# Digitalization in aerospace industry
[MUSIC] My name is Manfred Broy. I was for a long time a professor for software and systems engineering at the faculty of informatics at the Technical University of Munich. At that time I was basically doing research on systems engineering around the number of topics, which are also very interesting for of your avionic applications. Today I'm the President of the Center of Digitization here in Bavaria. And our goal is to make sure that these digital technologies, which are very rapidly developing, will be used in a number of applications. We organize our work in a number of so-called theme platforms. One theme platform there is a platform on mobility.
Play video starting at ::58 and follow transcript0:58
This platform looks at all different kinds of mobility and tries to understand how digital technology can support questions of mobility. And here we are close to a field which is also part of our mobility platform, but is a field on its own, the application of digital technology in the field of avionics.
Play video starting at :1:24 and follow transcript1:24
In principle, the step into a systems engineering in avionics was done during the Second World War for a number of reasons. One of the reasons was the upcoming radar technology, which really changed a lot the way military aircraft were doing their duties and tasks in the Second World War. After that, in the 60s and 70s, we had development of jet fighters, and jet fighters needed a lot of support according to digital technologies. They use what we call embedded systems which in the 60s were also filled up with a lot of software. And therefore it's interesting to study how the field of avionics developed under this technology pressure which came from the digital technology. One of the first very interesting points was the introduction of fly-by-wire. Fly-by-wire means that the pilot no longer operates his aircraft directly but operates his aircraft by giving input to a computer. Where the input is done also by a joysticks so that the pilot may have the idea that he directly controls the aircraft. But in the end he only controls the input to a computer and the computer activates activators which in the end make sure that the aircraft operates the way the pilot wants it. This was interesting in particular for aircraft fighters like the Eurofighter. Who is an aircraft that cannot be operated manually without the help of a computer according to its particular [COUGH] styles of operating. Later this idea was taken over also for civil aircrafts. And as a first large aircraft producer, Airbus decided to introduce fly-by-wire into its aircrafts. The result was that the fact that in the days before there were three persons in a cockpit, two pilots in an engineer, ended up with a situation where there were only two persons needed, two pilots. And the engineer could be replaced by the technology according to fly-by-wire. Nowadays aircrafts are really flying computers and the pilots are supported not only by fly-by-wire techniques, but by a lot of other systems, which are based on digital technology. What is in particular interesting is the very specific man machine interaction that is introduced in aircrafts today, the pilots are supported in many respects. One interesting example is that nowadays is the machine has processes which allow to observe whether there is a cognitive overload for the pilot. And make sure that the pilot gets exactly the information that is needed in particular in critical situations. And what is done in an aircraft is a very interesting example also for other areas of application of man-machine interfaces. But it's not only the pilots, it's also everything around an aircraft or inside an aircraft which is supported a lot by a digital technology. Be it the infotainment system of the passengers, be it the service systems around the aircraft, what's going on on the ground. And also how a passenger today books his or her flights. How a passenger does the check-in and how a passenger is informed at the airport about changes is very much based on digital technologies. So we can see, nowadays there is a kind of a synthesis between digital technology and aircraft technology leading into a very specific field, which is really demanding a lot of systems engineering. But this is not the end of the story, currently we see that a lot of other things are coming. For instance, one thing which we can observe data.
Play video starting at :5:57 and follow transcript5:57
Aircraft collect a lot of data and in the old days this data was not really analyzed. Nowadays we have machines and computers which are powerful enough to analyze all these datasets that are recorded by the aircraft. And use the results of the analysis of the datasets to bring in additional support. Interesting example would be predictive maintenance which allows us to recognize that there might be a problem with a certain part of an aircraft even before the problem is explicitly there and invisible. Another good example is artificial intelligence which allows to support, first of all, the man-machine interface but also to take over a number of tasks quite independently. So we could even imagine that in the future we will have aircrafts which fly completely on their own, autonomous. Completely controlled by their digital control systems and that no pilots are no longer necessary. Perhaps there will be a one person in the cockpit which does some supervision of what's going on. But it's no longer really taking part of the, really, process of lying. Another example is blockchain. Blockchain is a technology which allows to record datain in a distributed manner such that the recorded data cannot be changed later. This is interesting for logistic purposes, but it's also interesting for safety purposes, so we can record important parts of that. Another example would be the platform companies. And I believe that aircraft carriers and also aircraft producers are on their way to become platform companies which are based on software platforms for the different services they offer.
Play video starting at :8: and follow transcript8:00
So what we observe is a kind of a synthesis of different disciplines. Disciplines of informatics and of digital disciplines with disciplines classical engineering of aircrafts. They will come together, they are already today about to form a unique discipline of systems engineering, and this will change the world. In particular, it will change the way we produce aircrafts, we operate aircrafts and we use the aircrafts.

# introduction

Hello, I'm Gunther Reinhart and I teach production engineering at the Technical University of Munich. Welcome to our module digitization in production of the online course, digitization in aeronautics and space. Just a few words about me. I studied mechanical engineering at the Technical University of Munich, and I completed my PhD at the same university with assembly applications by robots. Later on, I took a lot of experience in industry as well as in science, experience about production technology, production Engineering and all. In industry I collected my experience together with BMW and with IWKA, which is a big production equipment manufacturing in Germany. Last but not least, I would like to announce that I am a member of the National Platform industry [inaudible] , what I will remark later on. My colleague Klaus Drechsler beside me, Klaus, would you like to introduce yourself? Yeah, my name is Klaus Drechsler, I'm the head of the Institute for Carbon Composites here at the Technical University of Munich. I studied Aerospace Engineering at the University of Stuttgart and completed my PhD there at the faculty of aerospace engineering. My industrial career started at [inaudible] in Autobahn and ended after some positions at time lot. I'm a [inaudible] EADS. So my background is aerospace and automotive, but always with a focal point of composite technologies. This will also be the focal point of our discussions today, adopting some examples how fiber placement technologies influence aerospace production technologies in the future. So hopefully we will have an interesting hour.
Play video starting at :2:22 and follow transcript2:22
Thank you. Digitization in Production is our topic today. We know that digitization has taken place in airplanes since several decades. Digitization in terms of airspace control, in terms of fly-by-wire, in terms of navigation or autopilots. Also in production, we use digital systems and digital approaches since several decades, beginning with the 1960s. Digitalization of Production means the automization of production, autonomous Production systems, assistance systems, or the connection of production modules or production equipment using digital linkage. But let me step one step back to production. What is Production at all? Production is the process beginning at the customer requirements up to the shipment of goods, and process steps of this chain are research and engineering, which is to define the product, the production planning, and department which prepares for production in terms of manufacturing of parts, assembly of products, facts of checks equality, and so on. Besides these steps, there's the Production Control Department with schedules, all those process steps for finishing a product and the materials scheduling which task is to procure, to supply the production with parts and materials. At the end of the chain downstream, find the goods being shipped. This is the chain of technical order processing downstream to the customer. Upstream in the other direction, goes the commercial aura processing chain, which means that mural of all the technical steps evaluated in money, typically departments are procurement, calculation, finance, and so on. Of course, those functions are supplied by other functions like HR, factory security, legal department, and so on. A corporate management observes, controls, monitors all those projects process steps, and controls the proper steps. This is the conventional order processing in a factory, what is now digitization. Let me step backwards to the Industrial Revolution. We all know from our history lessons at school that the first Industrial Revolution was inspired by James Watt with his steam engines driving a mechanical loom. This was in the 18th century. This was the first step against industrialization. It evoluted very properly and lot of machining and industrial processes have been mechanized and automized. Frederick Winslow Taylor founded the second Industrial Revolution. Proclaiming that labor in mass production can be divided into two parts, two segments, the brain work and the hand work. This means that in mass production, there are two kinds of people working. On the one hand, the white-collar people thinking, planning all those processes, and on the other hand, the blue-collar people doing, operating those plant processes. This was a huge entrance into mass production, into cheap products for everybody like cars, like dishwasher, and so on. In the 1960s, the third Industrial Revolution was introduced by integrating computers into production facilities into production machines like robots, like numerical control machines and so on. The first robot at all was introduced by the MIT in the US in 1965. Really in 1972, the first robots have been integrated in a car manufacturing plant in Germany. This was the beginning of this third area. In 1910, 1912, the fourth revolution raced into the factories using modern information technology equipment, modern software modules by doing Production chops. Production equipment has become more and more intelligent, interlinkable and was able to communicate in between or between human beings and machines. This was the area of Intelligent communication and connection of Production distance. This was the beginning of the fourth industrial revolution, which we in Germany called Industrie [inaudible]. Why Industrie [inaudible] and not Industrie 4.0? Well, this is a German brand mark announcing all people in science, technology industry to be innovative using IT equipment, using modern software modules, using modern networks, computer networks. Well, industrie [inaudible] is not a product, you can't buy it anywhere. It is not a project and it's not the process. What is it? It's a companion asking people to use IT technology with production and therefore, we have a lot of features included with the term industry [inaudible] Features like assisting systems, big data, CPS, digital twin, and so on. A lot of features. We just want to introduce to you four of them, the cyber-physical systems, assistant systems, digital twin, and robotics. Those four features are major parts of modern factories right now. Let's start with cyber physical production systems, the CPS or psycho-physically Production Systems, the CPPS.

# Cyber-physical systems
[MUSIC] Constant cost pressure, growing numbers of variants, and increasing quality requirements are daily challenges for production companies. In order to remain competitive, manufacturing companies have to produce smaller batch sizes more cost effectively. Which leads to an increase in the degree of production automation.
Play video starting at ::26 and follow transcript0:26
Nevertheless, sufficient or even increasing flexibility is to be realized in the system's. This can only be achieved if the production systems and their elements are closely connected and can react to each other. So called cyber-physical systems connect the real world with the digital world by enabling the physical systems to communicate with each other via sensors, actuators and the corresponding software.
Play video starting at ::55 and follow transcript0:55
Through this close connection, processes become more transparent and changes can be handled more efficiently.
Play video starting at :1:4 and follow transcript1:04
Cyber-physical systems, what a cyber-physical systems? Well, this term addresses the fusion of the cyber world, the world of computers, with the physical world, the world of machines of products, airplanes cars, whatever you want. And let me give an example of a cyber-physical system out of daily life. You all, I guess drive a car, and you all use your smart phones.
Play video starting at :1:40 and follow transcript1:40
You know those both items can be interlinked.
Play video starting at :1:44 and follow transcript1:44
You can hear music from the smartphone in the car system, the current system. This means a smartphone is a cyber-physical system and the car is a cyber-physical system, too.
Play video starting at :2:2 and follow transcript2:02
They are mechanical devices, they carry software and they use Internet technologies to communicate, the car as well as the smartphone. And this is the idea of the cyber-physical system in terms of they are characterized by the linking of real means, physical objects and processes with information processing means virtual objects. And those processes are driven via open partially globally information networks that are connected to each other at any time at ay localization.
Play video starting at :2:42 and follow transcript2:42
We can transform this principle approach into the production into factory. Means we use cyber-physical system for production. This is cyber-physical production systems, CPPs. And they enable now decentralized production. They enable the inter-linkage between production systems, between machines for instance. Even the connection between human beings and machines or product and machines, and even carrier systems with robots and human beings. All those items source those components can now communicate.
Play video starting at :3:35 and follow transcript3:35
They can describe their skills, their ability and can work together autonomously. This is the principle idea of cyber-physical production systems. And this principle idea brings us now to revolution in the automation approach of a factory. In the past, the communication process in a factory were strongly organized in the automatization pyramid. You can see it here.
Play video starting at :4:14 and follow transcript4:14
This means they have several level, several layers beginning with the field level. That's a process rounds. There are sensors and actuators working on the process. They are controlled by a computer controlled system, and those several computer controlled systems are connected and linked by a supervisory system at the supervisory level.
Play video starting at :4:42 and follow transcript4:42
Before operating processes are plant, as we discussed before, therefore, we have a learning level, and of course even a management level is available. Reporting to the managers of the factory, how production is running, how problems are being solved and how jobs are done. In future, we guess that these strong permit
Play video starting at :5:18 and follow transcript5:18
will be left and we can connect cyber-physical production system as we want. We can connect each part on at any level with another part. This means a very powerful communication between those components. On the other hand, this means we need new organizing structures in order not to end in chaos with the production systems, but to have a very autonomously, very variable, but systematically ordered production system at all. This is the future idea of interlinking computer aided production systems in future. Let me give an example.
Play video starting at :6:12 and follow transcript6:12
Here you see the typical scene of factory human being throughout the machines working together, and in future all those components in the they have four abilities. First ability is the spontaneous connectivity. Whenever a component meets another it connects to the other end, switches into communication mode.
Play video starting at :6:43 and follow transcript6:43
During this communication, the components are able to describe their own abilities, their capabilities. I am a screwdriver or I'm a robot or I'm a human being. And so the third ability is the task oriented programming.
Play video starting at :7:1 and follow transcript7:01
Means in future we do not need to write specific code on a very low level. In future we give commands, we give task to our facilities and they know how to operate, how to fulfill it.
Play video starting at :7:25 and follow transcript7:25
The fourth step is the automatic device parametization. That means that sensors, for instance, can adapt their own ability to the product they have to detect. If a new product comes with new shape, for instance, the sensor itself can adapt its awareness, its measuring system to the new requirements of the product.
Play video starting at :7:54 and follow transcript7:54
Those four abilities are abilities of a typical cyber-physical system. Let me give you an introduction of a future oriented scenario, which will be conducted in production future. For instance, sensors are able to communicate their needs or their abilities. And as you can see here, a camera can say I can detect part. I can detect electrical components. So the can say, I need a screwdriver for driving a screw into the case.
Play video starting at :8:46 and follow transcript8:46
Means the components are able to self described. The second step is the virtual modeling of resources in assembly or in manufacture. Means that the ability as remarked before ability of the components is now mirrored, is now simulated by digital models.
Play video starting at :9:13 and follow transcript9:13
And we can now study, we can now investigate the function of the components of the sensors of the production equipment
Play video starting at :9:25 and follow transcript9:25
in the digital model and optimize it, and of course plan, it automated. Automatically a computer program can plan now the production of an assembly sequence.
Play video starting at :9:41 and follow transcript9:41
The part knows first comes the screw, second comes the cover, and so on. There comes the wheel, the gear wheel for instance, and now it can require all the components, the production equipment components, which fulfill the assembly sequence.
Play video starting at :10:2 and follow transcript10:02
That means in future we will be able to automatically plan the whole manufacturing and assembly sequence.
Play video starting at :10:13 and follow transcript10:13
Now, this is the theory, let us now come to practice, and I would ask you, can you give us some examples of cyber-physical systems in the practice of airplane manufacturing?
Play video starting at :10:30 and follow transcript10:30
Yeah, so in aerospace engineering aerospace manufacturing, we have plenty of production technologies based on aluminium and titanium and more and more on composite materials. The most modern aircraft like the A350 consists more 50% of carbon composites. The unique thing with carbon composites is that the material is produced during the production. So we need to know how on material science, on structural mechanics, but also on production. And of course in aerospace, we have five different requirements to production compared to high volume automotive industry. Because our production number is much, much lower. But anyway, despite we have a lot of manual processes still in aerospace production. Industry field of knowledge is very important because it can help to improve the quality and it can help to reduce the engineering development time. And I will focus on the talk today on one technology that the fiber placement technology, where we are combining mainly robots together with so-called prepregs, where the matrix and the fiber is combined in a semi finished product. And by the control of the robots with all the understanding of the structure mechanics, we can automatically produce shell-like structures, but also very complex components in very high quality. And you see here an example of a fiber placement machine. And so, what you can see also here in this screen is that we are combining robots, we are combining a fiber placement head, where the fibers are placed to a tool, and this is really a chemical factory can say. So it's controlled by the pressure of the head, is controlled by the temperature. The temperature itself is controlled, for example, by a laser system. And this shows that we have a high quality during the placement of the fibers. The robot itself, of course, has to steer the fibers. So the fiber directions which are important for the mechanical performance of our components are controlled by the robot. And all together, we have, of course, a computer. This computer is collecting a lot of data because in this fiber placement head we can, of course, measure the temperature. We can measure the steering of the fiber, the direction of the fiber. And also we can measure the pressure and all these together defines the quality of our part. So after the collection of all parts, we can, for example,
Play video starting at :13:7 and follow transcript13:07
ensure that the quality of the part is very good and we can reduce the effort in the non-destructive testing for example, which is, up to now, very in important. And so we can improve the quality and we can cut down the cost by this automation. And some more examples, modern production facilities, like you see at in Augsburg have several of these production machines and in future they will communicate, they can exchange information. And if you have several parts, a big shell or very complex store surrounding structure. So these machines can optimize the process despite themselves are using all the data they are collecting. And all the logistics of the material can be controlled because we have to work with the material which is cooled down it stored at -80 degrees centigrade. But during production it has to work in room temperature. But at room temperature, we can only handle this material for several hours. And so logistics is also very important and to improve, for example, the it's very important that starting from this material storage up to the production uses several machines to the quality of the final part. All these things are connected together. And therefore I think it's a very good example for cyber-physical systems. So some more examples you see here the production, for example, of the A350 center fuel elements were very big shells being produced by fiber placement technologies. You see the wing structure of the A350, so fully automated to ensure good quality and to have, yeah, competitive cost, competitive production. You see some productions or some examples for very complex structures like the A350 or the door surround frame. So again, it's very important that we understand the material science, how we work with these prepregs in the fiber placement head. We have to understand the structural mechanics. So we have to understand how the fibers have to be steered in the placed under tool. And then, of course, we need the robot system, the robot control to guarantee that the fibers are already placed automatically on this tool.
Play video starting at :15:32 and follow transcript15:32
Yeah, some more examples we can work with various metric systems, thermoset or thermoplastic systems. And here you see another example, it's a space structure of the Ariane 6 rocket booster casing. Being produced by thermal plastic fiber placement where we are using a technology where we automatically placed the fibers, but we consolidated to the final stage. So it's a one step process and we do not need a second step in an autoclave or in the press. And so this is very interesting for big structures. But using the same technology, the same steps I discussed before.
Play video starting at :16:12 and follow transcript16:12
And finally, we will show a video of a technology we call fiber patch placement. It has been developed together by Airbus and My Institute and now the company Cevotec a spin off of My Institute is industrializing this technology and it's a very good example. And think of all the four topics of industry you will present.
Play video starting at :16:37 and follow transcript16:37
What is the difference between this Cevotec system and the systems we have seen before? You see, how to bring producing system. >> So we are not placing now tapes, but patches, and this gives us much more flexibility and we have integrated in this- >> We can produce smaller ready? >> Yes, yeah and very complex system so we can really use what we have learned in structural mechanics in the production. And in this one system, in the FPP system, the machine we will discuss later on, we have two robots. So we are using combined robots. We have a lot of integrated sensors instruction. And I think it's a very good example for all the fear for points and focal points of industry people know. >> Indeed cyber-physical system? >> Yes. >> That brings us to the next item, the digital trail.

# Digital twin
The increasing complexity of production systems and simultaneously decreasing innovation cycles raise new challenges for today's companies, which can be counteracted by the use of digital tools. The digital twin forms the basis for using these tools throughout the entire product life cycle and for optimizing production processes through the use of simulations.
Play video starting at ::31 and follow transcript0:31
This digital twin serves as a digital representation of the real plant, which accompanies it from development to operation. This enables a virtual commissioning already in the development phase in which the control logic can be validated and if necessary optimized before the real plant is put into operation. Because even in seemingly simple automation tasks, inappropriately selected parameters can lead to inefficient processes or even malfunctions. >> Let us skip to the next item of our industry funeral scheme, the digital twin.
Play video starting at :1:8 and follow transcript1:08
What is a digital twin? Well, this is the image of a real component in production and we can use those digital twins for simulation.
Play video starting at :1:21 and follow transcript1:21
Simulation is a very often used tool in production planning. And the definition says it is the representation of a system with its dynamic processes in experimental model, a digital model. In order to reach findings, we are transferable to reality back to reality. In particular the processes, they are developed, the tools, the product and so on. And we can investigate using this simulation system in order to get new findings about change or modify protection system.
Play video starting at :2:2 and follow transcript2:02
This is a general review of modeling and simulation of using digital twins.
Play video starting at :2:10 and follow transcript2:10
Simulation, by the way, has been used since many decades. In the 1960, physicists used simulation to show, to explain physical effects like magnetism. In the '85, simulation was used to show the behavior, the movement on those stress and strain of products. And end of the last thousand we had, we used simulation for investigating propagation of production systems.
Play video starting at :2:47 and follow transcript2:47
We can simulate the geometry of the systems. We can simulate the physical behavior of those systems. And even the organizational data, like reliability and so on, can be imaged, can be narrowed by using simulation systems.
Play video starting at :3:6 and follow transcript3:06
The last decade, the area of using simulation system was wide until the whole life cycle of a product, the simulation of the production, the simulation of the usage, the simulation of the dismantling, the cycling.
Play video starting at :3:28 and follow transcript3:28
This whole simulation model is called digital twin,
Play video starting at :3:33 and follow transcript3:33
as accumulation of the design of the product or the machine and the data collected by the operation and during usage of the production.
Play video starting at :3:49 and follow transcript3:49
These digital twins are able to be used to accompany all physical products through the whole product life cycle.
Play video starting at :4:2 and follow transcript4:02
For instance, the physical products with specific instantiation, the virtual representative or a typical digital companion. And even in the practice of planning a production system we can use those digital twins, as you can see here on this device. You can see a future product integrated with the real environment of a production line in reality. They are fused together at the production planner, can receive new knowledge and new achievements. This digital twin is also used to show the mirror of the image of product and process, production processes working together. How does a production process modify a product? What is the impact of the robot-welding a beam of a car and so on? This is all the, also a feature of simulation and production planning. In other terms, it means we can collect, design data. We can kind of like collect production data and we can collect operation data of the product and fuse it into one single model, and this is what we call the digital twin. On the one hand, you have the model being just described by the designer and the production planner. And on the other hand the data collected during production and operation of the car, in this case. And those together in one model is called a digital twin.
Play video starting at :6:3 and follow transcript6:03
Since we have the possibility to use, touch digital twins for just one machine, we can now widen it, broaden it to many machines, to human beings, to robots, to carriers, to a whole factory, and this is what we call the Digital Factory. The Digital Factory is a strong tool to investigate the whole factory, the future factory, in order to detect mistakes or bottlenecks, in order to see the impact of some production facilities upon the product and in order to investigate the reliability, the output of the whole factory. And, therefore, there exists a definition for Digital Factory.
Play video starting at :7:2 and follow transcript7:02
Given by the VDI for 499, the VDI is the German Engineering Association. And it reads, it is a digital factory, is a generic term for a comprehensive network of digital models, methods and tools, including modeling simulation and 3D virtual reality visualization integrated by continuous data management. Means we need digital images, the models, you combine it to a system, a production system, and we can investigate this system in order to get new findings. [MUSIC]

# Assistance Systems
[MUSIC] Especially for the operative employees on a shop floor, the demands on their work are becoming more complex because they have to produce faster, better and more flexibly. Additionally, the number of variants is growing for which different workflows have to be carried out. In order to meet these requirements, assistance systems are increasingly being used to support and relieve employees in a wide variety of tasks. Mobile devices in particular which have been an indispensable part of private life for several years are now increasingly finding their way into production holes. [MUSIC] >> Our next item is assistance systems.
Play video starting at ::54 and follow transcript0:54
Assistance systems raised during the last five years in our factories and they are established in order to give aid to the human beings in the production process. Those systems assist people in the increasingly complex world of production, in terms of improved documentation, employee-specific support, competence development, increased process reliability and accelerated work processes. And the expectation is to improve quality and flexibility with shorter lead time, less cost and less stress level using those systems. Well, there's meanwhile a manifold of assistance systems available.
Play video starting at :2:3 and follow transcript2:03
Those systems which support people support worker in her actions.
Play video starting at :2:12 and follow transcript2:12
And therefore, we can bring some structure into those manifold of assistance systems. We can divided into two major parts. The cognitive support, supporting the brain work and the physical support, supporting the work by hand. And even the cognitive supports categories can be divided into perception assistance and decision assistance. Mean, those systems can help to see mistakes wrong parts or can help to decide how the next step has to be during the process of production steps. Physical support systems can help to carry heavy parts or to achieve quite difficult or difficile production processes. This is the principal idea of cognitive and physical assistance system. And those systems can be used in very, very many applications. Like warehouses, where we can register incoming goods in a very simple manner, where we can identify components or the localization of a component in the warehouse.
Play video starting at :3:43 and follow transcript3:43
We can support the order picking from the storages from the shells.
Play video starting at :3:52 and follow transcript3:52
Assistant system can be used for production processes to improve the accuracy, to improve the quality or even to document the result of a pro system. Last but not least, outgoing goods can be checked by an assistance system whether they are complete or they are in good quality. The whole processes are being documented for instance in the airplane production. We have to document all those processes with their parameters and assistance systems are able to help human beings to do a good job. This is the idea of assistance systems.

# robotics
[MUSIC] The variety of variance in production requires flexible possibilities for automation. Robotics systems that can be used for a wide variety of tasks due to their design and free programming are suitable for this purpose. Since not all tasks can be fully automated, humans will continue to perform tasks and the two resources can share the work.
Play video starting at ::31 and follow transcript0:31
Mobile robots consists of a robot arm and a mobile platform, and can move autonomously in the production area. This results in additional degrees of freedom, so that the robot is flexible in terms of location and can therefore process tasks at various points in the production or perform transport tasks. Us, that work together with humans have sensors that are responsible for detecting collisions and thus, do not endanger humans. When working together, the robot can support the human by taking over tasks that are for example, not ergonomic. >> Robotics is the last item we want to address.
Play video starting at :1:16 and follow transcript1:16
Of course, robotics is not pretty new as I remarked before. Robots have been used since 1972 for almost 40 years, but during the last five to 10 years, there has been a very, very exciting development within the area of robotics.
Play video starting at :1:42 and follow transcript1:42
Coming from the conventional use of robots in terms of single purpose programming of robots, in terms of execution of the same tasks over five to 10 years. We are now able to create flexible robots, to create mobile robots, and to use robots-men collaboration.
Play video starting at :2:14 and follow transcript2:14
In other words, since we have lot of changes in production variants, new products, shorter product life cycles, we need robots which are able to react on the changes in the product and in the product lot sizes. New robots, new generation of robots are able to aware the environment, the new product and to reactive changes in their movement, in there blocking cycle on those changes in the products. Together with automated guided variants, they are now able to realize a very, very flexible production environment and even robots are combined with mobile vehicles, which we call mobile robots. And those mobile robots can change their workspace, they can come to human beings and health and doing some tricky difficult jobs and so on. Current trends in robotics are the human robot interaction, means one or more robots collaborate with human beings in one workspace.
Play video starting at :3:49 and follow transcript3:49
This requires new communication methods, new communication abilities.
Play video starting at :3:56 and follow transcript3:56
We do not have to program each single step of a robot new movement, we just have to give them tasks.
Play video starting at :4:8 and follow transcript4:08
And they have to resolve these tasks into space steps of movements, into logical steps and so on.
Play video starting at :4:18 and follow transcript4:18
We come to a much more easier programming of robots, and we communicate with robots by speech recognition, by gesture recognition or even by eye tracking. The robot follows the eyes of a human being in his environment. And even more than one robot work together with more than one human being, this is the highest end of human-robot interaction we are working on in research. This slide shows us a scenario in a real factory of a gear manufacturer and you can see the robot collaborating with the worker, working on the assembly of gear. Typically, the robot fulfills the difficult steps like the procedure of the housing. The housing is quite heavy and it's very easy for the robot to position these housing, picking it out of the bin and bring it on the table. The human being uses the difficile parts of the production sequence like the packaging of the transmission or the ceiling of the housing. Therefore, human being and robot divide their tasks, split their tasks and each part or each unit of this work system does those jobs which are mostly suited to the robot or the human being.
Play video starting at :6:9 and follow transcript6:09
Other examples for robots are for instance, warehouse operations, pick-and-place jobs in order to pick the correct parts from the pin or the processing of parts, delivering the part into a turning machine or another machine tool. Supporting assembly lines with delivering of parts or even spare parts for the assembly machine. And last but not least, the palletizing, the output of a machine produced parts are picked by the robot and palletized on those container. So far, the robots. >> So in aerospace industry there were specific tasks. So in a variety of aerospace, you do not see normally hundreds of robots in a street producing hundred thousands of parts because normally we produce only a few hundred parts. So the tasks are very specific, but all the challenges are very specific because they have to be a very accurate for example, to place the fibers on the tool. And they also have to be very affordable because like I said, they do not produce hundred thousands of parts of the robot but only a few parts. >> Yeah. >> So assisting a human being, producing big parts, this is very important. They must be very flexible, for example to produce one day, a big shell and the next day, a very complex part. That's only one example of the fiber placement. There are various examples you have shown but with different tasks and different challenges in aerospace production. >> Indeed, that's true. And that's a reason why I told you about the task-oriented programming. You cannot write a lot of lines of codes and describing each step in assembling the shell and so on. You just tell the robot, please produce this shell or that shell, and it has to solve the single steps to be done. >> That's quickly, because we have [INAUDIBLE]- >> And automatically. >> You can automatically- >> Yes, and the other point is we need to know the sensors within the process, which conduct the robot along the right movement, along the right path. We cannot program each single step of millimeters in the path. The robot has to take intelligent sensors and follow the part using the sensor data. >> And the power that we have the virtual system. So we know how the file has to be in place, based on the mechanical investigations and to know the knockdown factors if you don't guarantee that the angel is 95 [INAUDIBLE] 60 degrees. But then we have to justify this by the sensors and we have to know it is acceptable [INAUDIBLE], and the part is then good to fly or it's waste [INAUDIBLE]. >> The simulation in the digital model, we have the ideal path, that is a ideal path. But the transfer to the real path in production has to be done by sensor guided movement. >> And so we will see much more, many more robots in future and was based [INAUDIBLE]. >> Intelligent robots with sensors. [MUSIC]

# Conculusion
Klaus, as far as I know, you brought a video with you showing us some collaborating robots within the very exciting job tasks of Fiber Patch Placement. Perhaps we can have a look on that video. That's not only on cooperating robots, but it's also a cyber-physical system. So industry [inaudible] in a new development of our production technology. What you see here is the Fiber Patch Placement technology, and not like in the fiber placement technologies where we have endless or near endless fibers. Here we have patches we are placing. These patches can have various size, depending on the productivity we want to have, and to see here, also the cyber-physical system. So we are simulating the process. We have a link to the structure mechanics. So we have an optimization program in parallel to the development, and so according to the loads and the geometry, we can calculate the direction and the place of these patches. The optimization program uses a digital twin? Yeah, and it's transferred to the machine code. So the whole production system is then automatically transferred to the system with the two robots. You see one robot is handling the mandrel, the tool, and the other robot is handling the patches. The patches are cut into two pieces, and these pieces are then controlled in an online process monitoring system by a laser system to guarantee that the patch is there, where we need it, and the patch has the right direction. So we have an online quality assurance system and, like I mentioned before, we do not have only the control at the end panel, patch testing. This is a system for quality assurance. Yeah. I see. The patches are being used for avoiding waste. Is that true? Yeah. So the thickness of the path in each dimension, each geometry has the right dimension and the fiber orientation has the optimum. You see here, the length of the patches and of these grippers can be controlled, and so we can control all the productivity of this system. Here we have to find a path. It's now a dry fiber placement technology. So this patches are dry carbon fibers, and in a second step, they're infused injected, by an epoxy resin to have the final path. Okay. Very impressive. Thank you. Therefore, I thank you for your attention and I hope you enjoyed it. Thank you very much.
