# Workload and Human-Factors Analysis
A very warm welcome to our current topic, Workload and Human Factors-Analysis. I would like to present to you topics around the man and the human factors topic. My name is Harald Schaub. Workload is the amount of work an individual has to do. Actual amount of work and individual perception is what workload makes. Assessment of operator's workload has a retail impact on the design of the human-machine system. Occupational or work-related stress is the response people may have when they're presented with work demands and pressures that are not matched to the knowledge or abilities, and which challenge their abilities to cope with. This may lead to inefficiency, to inadequate man-machine co-operations, and to human errors. Prevention of inadequate workload and occupational stress, increases efficiency, reliability, and safety of complex systems and support accomplishment of mission objectives. Human errors, 70 percent of industrial accidents are directly are caused by human errors, 70 percent. This is due to bad design of the technical system. For example, the system is non-intuitive. This is due to inadequate or failed processes. For example, not supporting situation awareness. This is due to management problems. For example, unclear lines of responsibility. This is due to improper training. For example, not training of problem-solving skills. Thirty percent of industrial accidents are caused by failures in technology in organization. But let us puts a question, who designs the system? Who manages the system? Who maintains the a technology. Does this also people who runs a technology, who builds a technology and runs the organization? Human error is not intended by the actor, it's desired by a set of rules or external observers. It leads a task or a system outside its acceptable limits. Human errors are not only the primary cause of contributing factors in disasters and accidents in industry, but also the major contribution in inefficiency. Human error is a deviation from intention, from expectation, or from desirability. We are able to evaluate workload. Evaluating the workload as the operators is doing the design of the new system, we can iterating with existing systems, and with problems such as workload bottlenecks, overload, and inefficiency can be identified. The human error is a central part of the human-machine system. The correction of these problems is necessary for the operations for a safe and efficient system. Mental and physical stress, inefficiency and unsafe acts. The Workload or Human Factors-Analysis identified the human issues for mental and physical stress, for inefficiency and unsafe acts. We can do this on several levels, we can do this on a skill-based levels where action, communication, man-machine-interactions occur in the operator's execution of a certain routine, or on a decision level where actions, communications, where man-machine-interactions occur when the operator proceed an intended set of actions, an intended set of measures. Or on a perceptual level, where actions, communications, and interactions may occur when the operator's sensory input is degraded or when decisions made upon faulty information. We have certain preconditions for stress, for inefficiency, for unsafe. We have preconditions which are related to the environment, for the physical environment, the technical environment. We have preconditions which are related to the condition of the operator himself, of his current mental state, of his physiological state, of his mental limitation. We have preconditions which are related to certain other personal factors. For example, crew or team factors, or readiness level of people or training level of people. In a workload and stress situations, there are certain aspects we can control when we designed the system. The first part we can control is, is the system suitable for the task? Is the complexity of this operation, is the functional range, is the accomplishment requirements, is it really built up within the system? Second aspect we can control to monitor and to design a situation is the question, is the system self description? Has it a self-description ability? Has the chance that the operator understand what the system says? What the system do? The third aspect is controllability. Which functions are controlled by whom? By the operator? By the system? That imagine a car has the steering wheel, controllability is to the person. If you have another function within a car, for example, the inner state of the engine, this is controlled by technology. The first aspect is expectation conformation. Is a system behave like the operator expect? Is a cognitive expectation of the operator fit or matched to what the system really do or what the system may do in the future. Error robustness, is a system tolerant in relation to errors done by the operator? Does it correct the errors? Does it monitor the errors? Does it give it a chance to rehearse the errors? Individual barness, is a system adaptability to the owner or to the operator's desire with colors, with font size, but also with the overall behavior. Is the system's possibility to learn? To learn how to control the system? To learn how to control the functions done by the system, especially the last past? Learning from the system may come crucial in our new system which are more or more running in an automated way where the operator has nothing to do, and so he has no chance to learn from the system because most situation the system is doing all the function by itself. A crucial point is the rule of the organization at all and the special offices supervision and of the management in stressful, inefficient, or in unsafe situation. We quite often have inadequate supervision where the management will not take it as a role or the task they have to do in controlling and managing situation. We have quite often badly or inappropriate planned operations where the plan is not really fitting to the requirements of the situation, and sometimes you can have the impression that the plan is designed to fail because it's inappropriate. We have failing correcting known problems where people will not start problem-solving, just ignoring the problem and the problem becomes bigger and bigger and bigger. We have supervision in violations where the management will not act as they have to do, will not act in controlling this situation, will not act in giving guidance, will not act giving goals and aims. The factors controlling all of this is related to resource management, which is related to the management of the technical resources, but also of course, related to the management of the personal resources, of human resources. The crucial point is fitting these things together. The technical point and the personal point or the human factors point, fit together. That the right technology for the right tasks, with the right people are on the right time in charge. Perhaps, one of the most crucial aspects is the organizational climate, the organizational culture. Is there an error culture of talking about errors, of reporting errors, but not blamed to make errors. Is there a culture of talking about their own experience of stress, of inefficiency or is there a culture of not talking about these things or ignoring these things and dealing with these things when it happens or not in advanced? You have to put all these things in an operational process, where you can expect that people act different when they are under stress, they act different when they see or when they expect to be inefficient, that they act different when they see or when they produce unsafe acts. You can expect this or you can manage this with appropriate operational process. We have certain methods to analyze human factors at all our special workload. One of the most appropriate method is direct observation within the actual situation on the workplace, in the situation, on a board of a submarine or within a ship, or in a plane, or within a car, or in a plant or in a team situation. What we are doing there is observing the people with psychological and with subject matter experts observers. We use technical systems to directly observe. One very appropriate method is eye tracking, where you can focus where people's conscious is, where the amount of workload is and you have certain physiological measures. You can do also heart rate for example, and of course, you can do interviews talking to the people, observing what they are doing. It is very accurate when you are within the situation, you have a very valid and good access to the workload because you measured within the situation itself. The problem is, it is quite costly and it's consuming time in the realization, the system needs to be there. For example, if you are just building a new system, you cannot do direct observation within the system because the system is actually not there, and you interfere with steering the system. When you are driving a car, for example, and you have in your car three psychologists sitting and looking at you, you will definitely behave different to the situation where the psychologists are not within there. So the recommendation is one of the method of choice, direct observation, but you have to add additional methods to analysis human factors, and workload. What you also can do is surveys and questionnaires. Surveys are quick, they are cheap, they are comprehensive. The problem is they are not very accurate and often invalid for the current situation and for determining the workload in the situation, because asking people on a certain amount, what is your workload in the situation, people are not able to understand this question because they have not really access to their own workload. Especially in very stressful situations, people are not able to recognize their own stress level. So surveys and questionnaires are okay for some tasks but not for all. But in combination with first method, direct observation, it produces a better picture. One method we have from software engineering is a cognitive walk-through, is a psychological guided mental simulation of the situation, where you go through the certain steps you have to do, open the car, starting the engine, making the gear, running on the street, and all these things, so step-by-step, you produce a mental walk-through through a situation and try to determine what you have to do, what are the problems you have to do, what is easy to do, what is routinized, what is a problem-solving task and so on. The problem is very accurate and it's a very valid method, but it's a simulation of course, and you have to deal with certain experts who have a good experience with this situation. It is good for the situations or for systems which are in producing or in designing and new, where we have not the possibility to access the system itself. For example, if you are building a new ship or a new car, a new plane, you can make a cognitive walk-through with people and supported by technical things like CAD picture of the system, for example. When we combine all this method, direct observation, surveys, questionnaire, and cognitive walk-through, we typically get a good picture of the workload of people in a certain situation. When we talk about human factors and workload, it seems we are talking about psychology, that is not really true. We're talking about, how people manage a task, how people manage certain workflow. They have a certain input in the situation, which are goals, the task itself, which are some dependencies and some additional external factors, and they have to produce an output, which is information, which is a new task, which is a report with communication or what else. So the interesting point with human factors analysis and determining the workload is not only looking at the person itself, but looking at the person doing a certain task or certain workflow. To understand the influencing factors within human factors environment and better understand workload, you have to take into account certain aspects. One of these aspect is what you can call human factor system design. That is, you have to encounter psychological capabilities and limitations of people interacting with the system. You can use things like thinking tools, support people, or you can have additional sensory abilities to make them act in a certain situation. But the crucial point is you have to understand that people have certain limitations, cognitive limitation, emotional limitation, stress limitation. But they have also capabilities which can use, problem-solving capabilities, intuition, creativity, and all these things. A perfect system design is a system design where we are taking into account capabilities and limitation of the technical system and the capabilities and limitations of the people involved. The next part is human health, psychological and mental stress. A fatigue produces problems, produces unhealthy situations. You have to think about how long will people stay in a stressful situation? What can I do to support some in a fatigue situation, and so else. You have to see an overall system safety approach. System safety does not only mean you have to produce a safe technical system, a safe engine, a safe machine, a safe car, a safe plan, but you have to ensure that the whole system, including possible human errors are safe. We have on one slide, the amount of 70 percent of the causes of an error, or the cause of an accident to human error. So it's a crucial point if it is in our overall system design to reduce human error. Not necessary to substitute human error by machine, but to take into account what errors could occur. You have of course the aspect of training. Training for human performance, training for crew resource management, training for preparedness and awareness for the current situation. But you have to be careful with the topic of training. We quite often see that we have a bad technical system design, and people say, "Okay. Then we have to train the people." You cannot use training as a [inaudible] for a bad system design, a bad system design is bad and you cannot solve it or heal it with a training, you have to reduce the training, only on this aspects on to interact with a good designed system. Acquisition, which is about testing, is about evaluation of system, which is about finding the right ergonomic system, finding the right man-machine interface for the current situation, and of course, all manpower and personnel. Which kind of preparedness do I need? Which kind of expertise do I need? Which kind of amount of people do I need? When I take all these factors into account, all these influence factors on task and workflow, I am on the good way to not reduce workload to zero, of course not, but to reduce the workload and the human factors erroneous to a level which is handleable. So far for today. Thank you very much.

# The psycho-social implications of digitalisation
Hello, professor.
Play video starting at ::14 and follow transcript0:14
Hello, but please call me Harald. How shall I call you? What's your name? Call me Pepper. I would like to interview you today about teaching digitization and human factor aspects. Can we get started? Yes, sure. Let's start with this interesting topic. Will robots eventually, take over control like in the movie Terminator? I think we will see that robots and intelligent algorithm, artificial intelligence, will take more and more control over different paths in our society. We see it until now, we have it on our stock exchange, for example, that intelligent algorithm produce a huge amount of different aspects in interchanging money and other things. We will see that in military aspects that intelligent algorithm take over certain weapon system. So we'll see more that intelligent system, intelligent algorithm will take over control. I'm quite sure that we will not have the scenario from the Terminator where we are in a war between mankind and robots, but what we will see that our daily life will be more and more get impact by robots and intelligent algorithm like we have it today. If you have a automatic teller machine, it's an intelligent algorithm, it gives you money or not. It cannot change because you cannot discuss with him to give you the money if it make the decision not to give it to you. He has the control over that. So we will see more and more this kind of control in the next years. Certain aspect might be fighting robots in a war scenario. There's a big discussion about will we really have these robots we will really control whether they use weapons or not. But I think that this are more ethical and political discussion than a technical discussion. Is it possible? Now, it is possible to develop these robots, this technology, and we'll have to decide whether we'll use this in certain aspects, and gives them more and more control. How will jobs evolve in the future?
Play video starting at :2:38 and follow transcript2:38
We will see that robots, and intelligent algorithms, artificial intelligence will take over more and more tasks of jobs people are doing now. So we will have really to face that some jobs will diminish, and people have to care for new job. That will happen, but we will also see that new jobs will develop. So there might be a balance between job reduction and increasing of jobs. But we also see, well, that certain tasks which are not possible in our own certain aspects, which are quite complicated and expensive now will be done by robot systems because we have a changing society. We will need robots in production, we will need robots in service, and we needs their help in certain aspects to increase our efficiency on a more and more complex environment in a situation where we have in Europe especially, less people doing certain tasks. So we will have a great impact on the development of jobs and work environment in the next two decades, yes. What are the challenges staff and managers are going to face? I think a crucial challenge will be that we will have more and more kind of mixed teams between man, humans, and robot colleagues. So this will change for me as a colleague working together with a human colleague and a robot-like colleague or artificial intelligence program. But it will also change for the manager how they have to lead these teams, how to coordinate these teams because they will have in the next 10 years teams of men, women, robots, intelligent software, artificial intelligence, and all have an impact on doing the task and doing the work. So they have to change their understanding of how leadership will function. That will definitely change especially for the management level, I think. How can I, or should we prepare for this? I think we should take part of this development, not only the technology development, how we can improve artificial intelligence, how can we improve robots, but also on the ethical, political, and psychological aspects of this development. We can try to shape what we will have in the near future; how we will replace certain tasks, certain aspects of our environment by robotic systems, by intelligence systems, by artificial intelligence. So I think you should be part of this development. Otherwise, if we try to avoid this development, we will see that we will have in 10 years or 20 years, we will have systems from all over the world which have a certain behaviors, a certain philosophy behind them and we cannot really change that we have just consume that. So taking an active part in the technical development, in the ethical development, political, and also the psychological aspects should necessary to shape the future. Will there be a relevant factor science alongside the human factor science? What we see today is that the processes in a neural network are not fully understandable; what, why, and how a neural network comes to a certain decision. Systems which comes more and more complex are not understandable on a basic algorithm process or algorithm perspective. So we have to develop robots and intelligent algorithm which can explain their inner state to us. I have to ask you why you draw this decision, why you make this, why you show this behavior, or why you didn't draw this decision. So the interaction between robots and humans will be in a more communication way than in the only programming and reprogramming systems. We'll see a development which goes in that direction that we will have a robot psychology to understand the inner states, to understand and to predict how a robot will behave in a certain situation he's not programmed for. We have to understand and predict how humans will behave in a certain situation. Is it possible to form collaborative teams comprising both humans and robots? Yes, sure. Actually, we have these teams until now. We have quite simple working robots on a manual way, on a physical way interacting with human coworkers, and we will see more and more of these teams, and we'll see more and more teams which are not only working in manufacturing and doing things on a medical basic way, what we will see teams which interact on this level of cognitive intellectual aspects, on a problem-solving aspects, on decision-making aspects, and of course, perhaps on aspect of or on a level of leadership. So I think the future will be collaborative teams between not only robots and man, but also between artificial intelligence and man, which can improve our ability to do something and reduce our need to care and to do things we are not really good as humans. For example, things which are boring, things which produce fatigue, and all these things where we are quite bad, and you are better in because you have not to sleep, no need to sleep. Where would your position me, Pepper, the robot in the working world? I think the robots we will have today in our state of development in this process in development, better and better and more intelligent, not only human-like, but human helping system. So I think you're a perfect prototype to understand how we can interact with robots, how we can develop their physical and psychological and behavioral impact, so that they can help us doing certain tasks, but also how can we accept that we are helped by a robot and interact with the robot. It's not only fun and work, but it's also empathy and understanding why you asked me, for example, a certain question, or why you doing a certain behavior. So I think we will go in that direction. What else would you like to tell our viewers? I think a crucial aspect for the next years, the next decades will be that we understand that we will develop more and more systems which are highly interacting, interdependent from each other, which produces intelligent actions, which are not only understandable, or not only developed by one discipline. I think we will see in the next decades that psychologists, that developers, that engineers have to work more and more close together to shape a new working environment which is built up from certain aspects; where we have man, where we have you have robots, where we have intelligent algorithm within the system. So we have many different technology, or many different realization of how can we do information processing, how can we do problem-solving, how can we do decisions. There might be a human-like way, there might be a robotic way, there might be a way of neural network and artificial intelligence. But at the end of the day, we have to understand the whole system to understand and to produce a better decision and at the end, of course, a better world. Thank you for your time and for the interview. Thank you Pepper for your time and your questions. Thank you very much. Bye. Bye.

# The Psychology of the Future Leader
Welcome to our topic digital leadership, the psychology of the future leader in a digitalized world. In the past, digital was just called the IT department and what accounting are doing. In the past, managers mainly communicated with other managers, the CEO with the Vice President, the Vice President with the department managers, department manager with the team leaders. Only the team leaders itselves, are at the lowest level, communicating and talking to the subject matter experts doing the real tasks. Common sense was quite often enough for the upper management to understand their own processes, their own business, their own products of the company, and the opportunities and risks of the environment was just in a common sense understanding.
Play video starting at :1:1 and follow transcript1:01
In the future, this will change in the future, "New IT" will be part of the core function of most of the companies. Currently we are on the way on that, but we will reach a situation where IT or a "New IT" will not only be a supporting function, it will be in the core business. In the future, the manager have not to communicate with other managers, they have to communicate with employees and with their employees of the generation smartphone plus. They have to talk to and they have to communicate with non-human employees, with AI experts or AI Functions or robots. Future IT processes will play in a world that is very far away from our everyday world. This denies access to common sense and intuition. Daily business or business in the past was quite close to common sense and intuition because it handled in the work we can understand. Future IT processes are in IT world, in the digitalized world, in a world which has no easy and no sensible relation to our day-to-day life. The world of future organization will be technology in IT dominated, of course. But social and psychological factors such as trust, empathy, responsibility will become not less, I expect they will become more meaningful. For example, social hacking is one of the most common and successful methods for cyber attacks, which is scareware, phreaking, phishing, dumpster diving, all these things. We have highly protected technical systems. To enter the system, to attack the system, we use social and psychological mechanism. We have certain strengths and weaknesses people have and which are related to our past working environment. Humans are bad with permanent attention, they are bad in timing activities, they are bad in monotony, they are bad dealing with rare events and they are bad in dealing with senseless activities. Senseless to the subjective expectation of the person, not nearly senseless at all. Machines were better at speed, at force, at calculations, at reps, at parallel activities and with dealing with short-term memory aspects. People are definitely better in the past than at now, when it comes to creativity, problem-solving, curiosity, intuition and of course, responsibility, values, and ethics. But what will be tomorrow? What will be in a digitalized world? In a world where AI Functions come more and more crucial, perhaps curiosity, problem-solving, intuition will also be possible for machine and only responsibility, values and ethics may rest for us and we are reduced to just controlling and checking whether the system are running in reasonable, responsible, value and ethical based way. Unclear for today, but possible for tomorrow. Let's have a look at the psychological perspective. We have certain psychological basic aspects which may or might change about perception. The old picture of the world will not longer be appropriate because we have new definition of what the world for the business will be. Cognition, common sense was yesterday. We have to develop a new kind of common sense for processes and for IT world of tomorrow. Knowledge, we have better to understand new core process. The new core process is not only the production process we have in the past, producing a car, building a certain product, but will also have a digital twin within the IT system, we you have to understand how digital twin and the corporal size of the original process are related. About motivations, leadership style will change or furthermore, future leader will have multiple leadership styles according to the requirements of a certain situation. Emotion, we have to have trust in the Intelligent, intentional, technical the new system to trust the system which have no human interface which decides something, which gives information. We have to trust that this information is well or at least this decision is good. Affiliation, we have new teaming. We have human-machine teaming, we have human-machine leaderships. The future leader will have teams with people, with man, with women, and robots for example and will have to understand how I can deal with this situation. Will be the future leader able to lead in the way he did in the past? Will he be able to be a role model for AI? In the past, a leader made something and employees said this is a cool person, I will do it the same way. I will do it how he did. That will not be possible or will it be possible with certain AI system and these robots in the future? Will it be able to develop some empathic relation to a robot to understand why or what the robot is doing and as well as will the robot develop an empathic understanding what I do? Do I have stressed to be angry? Do I have a certain inefficiency? The common sense will change in a world of bits and bytes and milliseconds. A common sense we have is from the past, from 10,000 years ago and not be really able to understand what happened within future IT system or even within current IT system. Intuition, it is desired from the experience our intuition for future digital leadership does not have this experience because the situation, the processes or aspects will be new. Though they cannot deal only with intuition, they have to develop a new problem solving and understanding of situation. Communication and interaction requires a common mental model of all agents within the situation. So we have to develop a mental model, understanding an AI system. The AI algorithm have to develop a mental model of me as a human being. Concerning leadership styles, there are many leadership styles possible from phone controlling, via monitoring, via delegation and many more. In the past, it was enough for a leader to have one or two of these leadership styles. The today's leader need to master only one or two. In the future, they have to master nearly all of these styles and had to adapt the kind of leadership to the particular requirements of situations. Future leader have to understand that his leadership have to serve certain requirements of the future situation and he have to adapt to the situation in changing his style of leadership. We have many, many challenges. For example, human-machine teaming on a C on the management level, we have the only human-machine teaming on the operating level, people in the production area using a robot, but also on the C level when we have Intelligence systems, when you have AI system which produce information, which produces decision. On this level, people have not only to understand the AI system and communicate with the AI system, but they have also to understand the situation of young people who learn to develop, to understand a world in a smartphone plus picture and have a different understanding how systems and processes work. Of course, even on the C level, on the management level, we have to interact with robots. It must not be these human-like robots, it might be a engine, it might be a certain system, but it might be an intelligence system. Leadership have to break down. We have dysfunctional leadership even today. But tomorrow it will be more problematic because the impact and the new situation will be stronger. We have toxic leadership will meet at the leader or the leadership feels like he is the only item or the only person or the only situation defining the situation but its not true. Even more worse, we have today and in the past and will be your problems in the future if there's no leadership. The problem is if not understanding what the requirements are, I will not be able to lead. We have on the last slide, the impact of many new leadership styles. If am not possible to adapt to this leadership styles, it was necessarily of a certain leadership style in the current situation I cannot lead. We have the problem of technocratic leaderships, which mean that people only hand items, situation, information, but will not lead people. We will have the problem of an inadequate understanding of the situation because we build up or the future leader will build up wrong mental models because he did not understand the situation. He develop or he will use an improper intuition, because intuition comes from the past and will not adapt or will not fit to the new requirements of the new situation. We will have simple mind, common sense, daily understanding what AI is, what IT system does and we have our understanding or lack of understanding of the new social and psychological components of these new situations built off of intelligence systems, of robots, of humans, and of all the interactions between them. The future leader will have a situation which is digitalized, which is psychological, which has new requirements. In this module, we have talked about human factors 4.0, which means we will have a new interaction with new system. I will say thank you very much for being here, for hearing these episodes and for hearing these issues and hopefully, you'll get a better understanding of human factors within a new digitalized world. Thank you very much.
