# The World of Certification covering CAMO
Welcome to my lecturing Managing Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul for Civil Aircraft. I would like to introduce myself, first of all, my name is Josef Mendler, I'm Aircraft Engineer almost 25 years, and working now as a compliance verification engineer in various companies, design organization. So I'm highly involved since a couple of years, more than two decades in this world of certification, and here in lecture 1, I would like to focus on the World of Certification covering CAMO, which means, Continuing Airworthiness Management Organisation. First of all, let's have a look to the phases of aircraft development. In this phases, three parties, main parties are involved. It's the engineering, the manufacturing, and maintenance. Engineering is mainly oriented and guided by the requirements of aircraft engineers. That means, consisting of compliance with verification and certification requirements in correlation with significant load cases, functional specifications, etc. Customer liaison, and In-Service-Support, is a additional challenging task which has to be taken into account in the very previous and early stage of phases of aircraft development. Engineers are definitely interested in applying cutting edge technologies in their new aircraft they are going to develop. The second party is the manufacturing. These are manufacturing facilities and those are mainly driven by cost, and here, cost reduction, of course. Costs are mainly composed by recurring costs and nonrecurring costs. Nonrecurring costs are determined by engineering stuff. Customer support is also a major issue of manufacturing facilities because customers are interested in getting spare parts in order to perform specific repair procedures they are accredited for or allowed for. Robustness of the manufacturing process is another challenging task which has to be fulfilled by manufacturing facilities. Manufacturing facilities are at least in the duty to guarantee a repeatable, high-quality of produced parts. Last but not least, the cutting edge technologies should also be applied within manufacturing, but of course, those applications are over covered by cost reduction demands. The third party is the maintenance facility. Maintenance at least is interested in having robust structure and systems. That means, the system must be inspectable, it must be repairable, at least it must be accessible. Corrosion resistance is another driving factor which determines at least the fatigue life limits, and large inspection intervals means that's in correlation with those determined factors. Low-cost of spare parts is another item, which means that the design operating costs could be kept small. Those three parties, engineering, manufacturing, and maintenance, also cooperate along the line of certification. Certification of an aircraft is at least determined by two major milestones, that's a type certification and the aircraft certification. Type certification is issued by the authorities in national terms spoken, the Luftfahrt-Bundesamt or in European terms spoken, EASA. For North-American market, the FAA is responsible. But at least the input must be provided by Engineering. Engineering, which takes into account the certification requirements. Here for a fixed-wing aircraft, so it's EASA part 25 or the FAR 25. Here with this conformity and after check of the authorities, the type certification is issued. In the next step, the production and manufacturing facility is required. Here, the conformity to the requirements, to the documents, to the design documents must be stated by production, and after checking and being issued by the authority, aircraft certification is cleared and is issued, then the aircraft is able to be put into operation. The operator at least is interested in maintaining the certification, and that means maintenance is a major challenge for those operators. So these operational items and maintenance items are determined by EASA Part 145. In order to repeat these terms, this very significant and important terms, let's have just a look at those three topics. Types certification is a prototype assessment, which at least checks the conformance and the certification of the prototype assessment is the base for the accreditation of the aircraft. Then we have the aircraft certification, which is the statement of conformity issued by manufacturing. Declaration of accordance of manufactured aircraft with approved prototype means it is the airworthiness of the single part and the system. The certification is at least the base for the flight accreditation of an aircraft. In the third step, we have the maintenance check. It means that the declaration of the accordingly accomplishments of maintenance is issued and the certificate of the maintenance check is implemented. That means, this certificate of the maintenance check is the base for the further operation of the aircraft. Let's look at the cooperation of EASA part 21G, and part 145 in order to understand the cooperation of engineering, manufacturing, and air operation. Engineering, first of all is accredited according to part 21J. There the standards and regulations, the certifications, for example and the specifications accordingly are stated, and the engineering provides a compliance statement. That means aircraft is compliant with the certification specifications which are issued by EASA. EASA then releases this type certificate. If that's issued, then again, the manufacturing company accredited according to 21J, which is also taken into account the standards about how the aircraft is manufactured at least than states the conformity, that means the aircraft is manufactured in conformity with the certified type. That means according to all the documents which had been issued by the engineering. In our case in Germany, the national authority Lufftahrt- Bundesamt then issues the certificate of airworthiness in German "Verkehrszulassung." The aircraft is then put into operation. Again, the aircraft is accompanied by standard manuals and also by a definite maintenance program defined by design organization based on in service experience. For maintenance, which is again, according to EASA part 145 accredited standards and regulations of driving factors. Maintenance, repair, and overhaul is a major issue which at least finalizes the statement of conformity, after that aircraft can be put back into operation again. Maintenance, according to EASA part 145, which at least covers CAMO, means that the maintenance organization are allowed to perform all activities only on the basis of approved maintenance data of a design organization. CAMO maintenance requirements are described in specific documents. For example, the aircraft maintenance manual, AMM, or the component maintenance manual, CMM, also engine manual or structural repair manual are of major issues in order to provide some scales for maintenance activities for the maintenance company or the airliner, and the operator of the aircraft. Those manuals then are designed for one specific aircraft type only. Maintenance also may only be carried out within the officially approved scope. For this purpose, as distinction is made between three basic maintenance approaches, there is an A rating that means covering the complete aircraft, entitled to maintain the aircraft includes also aircraft components, that means, for example, the engine or the APU, that's the auxiliary power unit, provided they are in the installed state. The B rating refers to the engine rating, entitled to maintain the dismounted engine and APU with associated aircraft components. The C rating is at least a component rating for maintaining dismantled aircraft components, excluding the engine and the APUs. Documentation as already mentioned, is a wide area which has to be associating the aircraft at least and is issued according to the Air Transport Association Specification. So we have the general requirements which at least issued by the authorities, FAA, EASA. Then we have the product design requirements. These are the drawings, the documentation from stress department, fatigue department, and so on. Of course, based on that safety, reliability, and maintainability manuals, the AMM are issued, also the certification and the qualification, ACD or SJR, structural justification reporting. The customer support is at least supported and accompanied by the SRM, the structural repair manual, and the IPC, TSM. IPC means for example, illustrated parts catalog. So coming to an example, we also can see that according to EASA part 145, maintaining is performed according to a typical interval sequence, which is also correlated to a definite duration and also to a definite effort. So just for example, starting out with a trip check is, just in front of each flights for duration of half an hour, so it's a quite limited man-hour of half an hour again, or walk around cockpit checks, visual checks are the typical work steps to be performed. Ramp check, service check, E, B, C checks, and up to D check, which at least last for a longer time of four weeks, and a typical interval for that is 130 months. You can see that the effort is quite high, up to 30,000 man-hours. That means here the overall of the complete structure and system is performed, contains all the above mentioned inspections, painting, and polishing. So just to provide an example, what are the implementing rule continuing airworthiness? First of all, we have a terms of approval. Maintenance organization are allowed to perform all activities only on the basis of an approval provided by the authorities. These limitations can also be seen in the above mentioned manuals. Then we have the facility requirements. Facilities are provided appropriate for all planned work, ensuring in particular, protection for the elements. Specialized workshops and bays are segregated as appropriate in order to ensure that environmental and work area contamination is unlikely to occur. Then last but not least, we have the personal requirements. The organization shall appoint an accountable manager who has cooperate authority for ensuring that all maintenance required by the customer can be financed and carried out to the standards required by this part. This accountable manager shall ensure that all necessary resources are available to the accomplished maintenance. So let's conclude on that, I'll provide here a set of literature and we'll be happy to guide you to the next lecture.

# The Significance of Testing concerning Maintenance of Aircraft
[MUSIC] Welcome to the lecture Managing Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul for Civil Aircraft here in Lecture 2. I will guide your interests onto the significance of testing concerning maintenance of aircraft. First of all, let's have a look at the relevant certification tests. Afterwards we will address design philosophies addressing Maintenance. And at least, I will show you some examples on component tests and full scale tests. What are the certification tests? Certification tests can be mainly oriented along the test pyramid, you start at the very bottom with Coupon testing. That means you determine stiffness, static strength, fatigue and damage tolerances, also take into account environmental effects in moisture and temperature. After that, you are going to manufacture elements, for example joints, shear webs or structural details. If you finalize those tests successfully, the material qualification, at least, is successfully performed. After that, you manufacture details, like stiffened panels, major joints, sections and are going to test that according to the load conditions and boundaries you define in advance. After that, subcomponents are manufactured like wing boxes. And completing those test scenarios successfully, the Manufacturing Process Qualification is successfully performed. After that components are tested like wing, or empennage, or fuselage structures, in order to aim for the full scale aircraft testing, that means also testing the static loads and also fatigue and damage tolerance loads. And at least performing those tests successfully, the full aircraft qualification is accomplished.
Play video starting at :2:7 and follow transcript2:07
Let's look at design philosophies addressing maintenance.
Play video starting at :2:11 and follow transcript2:11
First of all, we have two approaches. There's a Safe Life Design and the second one is the Damage Tolerant Design. Safe Life Design means that we are determining a scatter factor for load level, material, manufacturing process and geometry.
Play video starting at :2:29 and follow transcript2:29
At least here, we do not determine any scheduled inspections, but that definitely affects material selection, design principles, stress levels with Kt factor, manufacturing quality and health monitoring.
Play video starting at :2:46 and follow transcript2:46
The second philosophy path is a Damage Tolerant Design. Here we have first of all a Fail Safe Principle. Fail safe means several items of the structure and the load path can fail. In order to prevent hazardous effects, we can use Crack-Stoppers in order to limit the results and the effects of those local failures or also we can use the Multiple Load Path philosophy. Crack-Stoppers and Multiple Load Path philosophy then determines the design principle, the residual strength, which is at least the strength after a single failure occurred. Of course also the inspection intervals is the inspection program and the health monitoring, which also determines that we have a crack growth velocity, which is determined in advance and also a significant basis for certification. Of course for Multiple Load Path philosophy, we have to provide that by functional tests. A second potential for Damage Tolerant Design is the Safe Crack Growth. But that's definitely determined and based on a detailed knowledge of material. So material selection is a challenging path. Design principles are, of course, also determined by that. Stress levels are then of significant item, initial crack size, critical crack length determines, at least the inspection program and also the health monitoring.
Play video starting at :4:25 and follow transcript4:25
To show an example for a Fail Safe Design Concept, let's have a look at the wing fuselage attachment of a Dornier 328 wing box aircraft type design.
Play video starting at :4:38 and follow transcript4:38
Here, let's have a look at the right side of this transparency. Here we see that we have a three layer bracket. Outer layers are aluminum, the inner layer is titanium. That means titanium so far in a undamaged status is not loaded, not covered by any load. It means as soon as an outer bracket of aluminum fails, the titanium will take over the part to transfer the load through the sections.
Play video starting at :5:15 and follow transcript5:15
Let's have a look at some potential examples and Component Tests, Full Scale Tests. Again, looking at this structural test over a program of the Dornier 328, which could be an example, but which is also definitely transferable to all other civil aircraft testing programs. Here we have the component tests and we have up to full scale test. Here you again can see the major items of the test pyramid.
Play video starting at :5:49 and follow transcript5:49
But at least we have to perform those for test scenario. We have the static test. We have the dynamic test. We have combined static and dynamic tests and we have full scale test specimen. Of course that's determined by specific boundary conditions. Here we have the extreme load conditions. Also including the environmental knockdown factor, which at least takes into account environmental effects, like moisture and temperature applying composite structures. In the second state, we also have to provide and substantiate the reliability and integrity of the aircraft structure. Limit loads without visible damage must be withstand. And life at least is a major item which determines inspection program and at least the maintenance. Here, you can just see an test setup for the A400M wing horizontal stabilized in the background of this picture. You also can have a look at the fuselage of the A400M.
Play video starting at :6:57 and follow transcript6:57
This test specimen was performed by IABG in Dresden. Full scale test, what is the purpose of that? Well, at least we check and verify and substantiate the main load paths, what we at least as engineers determined in advance. Of course, we also have to provide the correct deformation behavior. That means, is the stiffness adequate what we at least designed and manufactured and assembled? Then the verification of the comprehensive analysis, which is at least gaining major importance in the age of digitization. Strength and rigidity of the overall structure is a very important aspect, again to provide safety for aircraft operation. Stability behavior, again, another failure scenario, which has to be taken into account. And last but not least the verification of the life requirements has to be substantiated and at least has to be proven that those are in accordance with the requirements issued by the authorities. Here you can see the wing of the A380, again a test setup of IABG, load introduction is here in red colors shown by load parts and just positioned underneath of the wing.
Play video starting at :8:27 and follow transcript8:27
That's a look at the fuselage, German [FOREIGN], fuselage where you also can see that it's pressurized. So you have to incorporate and implement a specific test
Play video starting at :8:41 and follow transcript8:41
load introduction in order to provide the pressure increase within the fuselage accordance to the outer ambient pressure.
Play video starting at :8:54 and follow transcript8:54
The full scale test usually is concluded by a residual strength test. That means you just load the structure until it will break. That's here in this example performed by the horizontal stabilizer of the Dornier 328 aircraft and here you
Play video starting at :9:16 and follow transcript9:16
can see on the right side of the picture how this structure fails. It's a complete CFRP composite fiber reinforced plastic structure incorporated also with repair areas and here you can see the black patches which are repair patches. So let's conclude on this item the significance of testing concerning maintenance aircraft, again, some literature are mentioned here and I will come to the next lecture within this session. [MUSIC]

# The Importance of Supply Chain within Maintenance
[MUSIC] Welcome to the lecture managing maintenance, repair, and overhaul for civil aircraft. Here in lecture 3, I would like to focus on the importance of the supply chain within maintenance, especially addressing in the first chapter supplier qualification. We have to take into account different levels of approvals of the supplier. In a upper level, we have the suppliers with approval by a civil authority. In the next level, we have suppliers without approval by a civil authority. In a third level, the suppliers do not have any approval of a civil authority, a design organization approval or a certified Quality Management Systems. Then, we have manufacturers of articles with their own approval, means type certificate or production certificate, or TSO means technical standard order. On the manufacturing level, we have manufacturer of standard articles with manufacturer of on ground equipment and we have distributors. Let's have a look at the different levels in detail. Suppliers with approval by a civil authority. These are suppliers that manufacture overhaul or repair devices components according to specifications from the type certificate or supplemental type certificate holder. And have their own approval by a civil authority as an aviation organization, according to 21J, 21G, Part 145. Supplier will have approved design data and authorization from the design holder to manufacture the product. Each time the supplier is involved with a deviation from a certified but undelivered product supplier, must recertify the product under its approval. The supplier manufacturer and maintain the supplied item under the supervision of its responsible civil aviation authority. They must ensure that these activities are authorized by the production limitations record, capabilities list, or, at least also, operation specifications.
Play video starting at :2:36 and follow transcript2:36
Let's have a look in the next step at suppliers without approval by a civil authority. These are suppliers that have documentation provided and approved by the TC or STC holder. That may manufacture components and also overhaul components some assemblers or parts not approved by a civil authorities. The supplier definitely works on the responsibility of the OEM, which is Original Equipment Manufacturer, usually it's the TC holder. And this we OEM approves and suppliers technical documents production plans, and inspection instructions as necessary. The manufactured products or the tests performed with provided production plans can only receive a worthiness approval from the OEM. So the TC holder must be informed if the proof process is changed. And an approval for the new process must be obtained.
Play video starting at :3:39 and follow transcript3:39
So the TC holder must approve sub-contracting also. That means you must be definitely informed. The TC holder will monitor serial production by means of routine audits.
Play video starting at :3:52 and follow transcript3:52
Addressing type of product, production process, third-party monitoring results, and, at least, quality of delivery.
Play video starting at :4:1 and follow transcript4:01
What are the suppliers without approval by civil authorities design organizations or a certified QMS. As a general rule, it's not possible to deliver articles to the OEM under those circumstances. But the supplier can be approved on a case-by-case basis for limited deliveries. In this case, OEM quality assurance department will conduct a quality system audit and will approve based on the results.
Play video starting at :4:31 and follow transcript4:31
Manufacturers of articles with their own approval. For articles that the supplier owns the design responsibility and is the holder of the approval through the Civil Air Authority, the CAE of country of manufacture. The supplier is obligated to manufacture the item under the supervision of its CAA, and the regulations of its organizational approval. The OEM is to be informed immediately if this approval is surrendered, suspended, or at least, revoked. Articles are to be marked and delivered with an authorized release certificate, which indicates the approval number.
Play video starting at :5:16 and follow transcript5:16
Then we have manufacturer of standard articles. The manufacturer/supplier is obligated to comply with the ISO 9100 requirements or an equivalent. Articles will be delivered with a Certificate of Conformity, unless otherwise noted. Manufacturer of an on-ground equipment, the supplier's quality system is obligated to comply with ISO 9100 requirements or an equivalent. And then, at least where the distributor is responsible for purchase, storage, splitting, and sale of products without affecting product conformance ordered by the OEM. The supplier's quality system must comply with the AS/EN9120, which relates to aerospace series, quality management systems, based on ISO 9100 requirements or equivalent. So how to control the article and at least the material flow under those aspects? First of all, aviation companies have to take the responsibility for quality assurance and the integration of products that are purchased from suppliers from all over the world, and at all levels of the supply chain.
Play video starting at :6:44 and follow transcript6:44
Obligations to ensure the compliance of the parts and materials is another major step. Materials used with a specification and a reference to the source of manufacture and supply. And a very significant item is the demand of traceability, means traceability back to serial number or batch number. Traceability of the product development and difference between target status and actual status that, at least also, steered and controlled by the configuration management. And, at least also, traceability of all products from a raw material lot up to the final use.
Play video starting at :7:28 and follow transcript7:28
So traceability is relevant and very significant and important for safety critical items that relates to system and structure. And the level of details how far you perform this traceability, is definitely under the responsibility of the aviation company. Consistent and transparent material tracking requires a standardized process. And must meet the high demands placed on documentation management. Master data management with correlating based data. Traceability to be provided by enclosed certificate.
Play video starting at :8:11 and follow transcript8:11
One major item is subcontracting, and here you can imagine you also have to follow some restrictions and consider the requirements.
Play video starting at :8:23 and follow transcript8:23
What are the possibilities of the value chain of aviation companies performed by subcontracting support? Inhouse performance or subcontracting as an extended workbench could be performed and covered by aviation approval of the customer, if that's internally. External performance, performance is covered here by aviation approval of the supplier.
Play video starting at :8:53 and follow transcript8:53
But what must be defined at least the scope of outsourcing, type and extent of aviation approval. The schedule and the milestones, responsibilities. Also, very important communication lines, which at least determine interfaces and interface information which have to be transferred. Then also the documentation to be provided by the customer. That means is it approved data, are there is specifications available, lists, how what to be delivered? Documentations by the suppliers, that means enclosed certificates. And supervisions of the supplier by the OEM, by the aviation companies, for example, through audits.
Play video starting at :9:36 and follow transcript9:36
Again, a list of a set of literature. And here with this, I close the section.

# Interaction of Maintenance and Product Life Cycle
Welcome to the lecture Managing Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul for Civil Aircraft. In Lecture 4, we will have a look how maintenance and product life cycle are going to interact. Let's have a look at the maintenance tasks. Maintenance tasks are mainly defined by DIN 31051 and subdivided in four columns. Here we have the service operation, which at least tries to maintain the target state. Then we have the inspection, which at least focuses on determination in assessing the current state. Repairing is the third column. Here, the requirement heads out for restoring the target state and the fourth column is concentrating on improvement activities, which means increasing functional safety without changing the function itself. Those maintenance tasks have to be reflected within a quality management system, which is at least based on a maintenance organization of Part 145 according to National Aviation Authorities. The quality management systems can be influenced and targeted along the requirements of ISO 9001 or 9100 series, and definitely is infected by the authorities according to EASA and Luftfahrt Bundesamt. JAA by the way, does not longer exist here. JAA is a former Joint Aviation Authority by the EASA authority, now superseded. Quality management. Quality management consists of several elements of a QM system. Here we have the responsibility of Board of Management. We have at least to fulfill and look at regard customer requirements. Also, legal requirements must be considered. Quality assurance strategy is a major task for the board of management to be determined. Then their QM system, what we at least saw on the previous slide has to be established and also the quality management assessment. Of course, the planning is a major responsibility of the board of management. Then the operational level. Operational management means engineering development processes must be established and documented. Procurement, customer relations, production, and also MRO, which is at least maintenance, repair, and overhaul, which must be determined and guided by operational management. Then we have the resource management which reflects quality of personnel, of material, of infrastructure, also information flow, communication, and working environment, which also has to be taken into account by safety issues. Controlling means supervising the processes in order to ensure quality requirements. Risk mitigation is of major task in order to be aware where quality could be failed. Failure management is a correlating and corresponding issue. Data management and continuous improvement are a subsequent discipline for the controlling item. Documentation, you can imagine documentation is requirement for a functioning quality management system. On the basis, you see, we have the standards, we have the specifications, we have the production plans, material specifications, and also work instructions. Based on that, processes are described, processes are fixed, processes are defined and procedural instructions are then issued. That at least is transferred to operational handbooks, which are necessary also to guide the quality management system. Operational handbooks which are, for example, the design organization handbook, production organization handbook, or maintenance organization handbook. What are the correlating elements then for product life-cycle management in order to illustrate the interaction with the maintenance. Here you can see a typical setup of a product life-cycle management systems. We have definite interfaces to the engineering, to the supplier, to the factory, and to the customer. These all disciplines are then headed by and guided by management, which also takes responsibilities and tasks within the product life-cycle management. Let's look at the product data management. Here we have definitely the interface to the engineering. We have taken into account the design architecture, the document structure, change management systems, which at least is also followed by conflict management and the release management items. Production development management is at least adjacent to the engineering department, also guided and functioned by the PDM. Here for the production development management, we have manufacturing and assembly processes. We have manufacturing data management, we have tooling equipment, we have facility layout, but also we have analysis of data management, which is at least provided from engineering to production facilities. A major interface here is the factory and also the digital factory, which is at least also determined by and configured by digital data setup. Materials sourcing must be provided by the supplier. That means, here we have to assess the supplier, at least also the strategic supplier, which has to be provided on the basis of a certification platform. Then also data exchange is a very important task which has to be performed and delivered to the interface of the supplier. Also change management, where the supplier has to be kept informed how the design is developed. Then also we have to take into account the customer needs. This must be managements managed by requirements management. Functionalities, configurational aspects has to be considered and also at the after sales aspect has to be performed and has to be delivered to the customer on the basis of spare parts and services. As already said, management is heading those different areas and overtakes some responsibilities and tasks. That means portfolio, program and project management. Risk mitigation is a very significant item which is performed by management and at least guided. Cost control, which is also linked to life-cycle management, governance and compliance, and also analytics and reporting.

# Maintenance in the Age of Digitalisation
Welcome to the lecture, managing, maintenance, repair and overall for civil aircraft. Especially in Lecture 5, I would focus on the maintenance in the age of digitization. Here, we have first of all, to look at relevant maintenance strategies. Let's again start out with the setup of maintenance strategies according to the four column, service operation, inspection, repair and improvement. All those activities are covered by cost aspects by the direct operating costs, DOC. These are subdivided and can be subdivided into operational, service, aspects and depreciation.
Play video starting at :1:3 and follow transcript1:03
Of course here, for as maintenance aspects, we have to take into account two qualities and two scenarios of maintenance. First of all, it's a scattered one and the other aspect which definitely happens also during aircraft operation is the unscheduled maintenance. In order to rank that to categorize that, we have to have a look to the evolution of maintenance. First of all, you can run, operate your aircraft, your system up to a failure. That means you fix a failure when it broke or you fix the system when it broke. The next aspect is the preventive approach. It's time based activities. There, you just change the potential system or structure when it's possibly, potentially going to fail. Then we have the condition based aspect means based on indicators. But especially at this level, you already have to work with some sensoring systems, which at least indicates that some failure could be happen in the future. Then we have the predictive for aspect and the predictive maintenance. So that means action is performed just in time. Last but not least, and which is now relevant for digitization, it's the prescriptive maintenance. That means adjustment of maintenance measures to assure the required maintenance where and when it's needed. Monitoring of the system with the help of Internet of Things in real time regarding the condition of the equipment. This results in a flexible maintenance strategy in which maintenance is only used when and where is needed. This type of maintenance is the so called prescriptive maintenance. So what does it explicitly mean? First of all, let's look at some maintenance scenario. We have a part of the plant maintenance, we have event oriented and we have also the integration of a sensoring system for health monitoring aspects in the aircraft system. Usually, we have an input from load and usage monitoring we get based on that the possibility to perform diagnosis. Then we have on a virtual basis for example, finite element models, damage models which can at least use to forecast some failure scenario, some failure occurrences. But what's very essential here, we also need to take fleet data into account for health management, which is event oriented. If that's successfully installed, also based on these prescriptive maintenance approaches, we have no unplanned maintenance. We have improved operational planning. Aircraft is utmost in operation. Optimization of downtimes is correlating to that and the direct operating costs are reduced. So what does it mean? Prescriptive maintenance offers the opportunity to drastically change maintenance practices through case specific decisions. Supporting best action which improves over time based on sensor related feedback mechanism. As a part of the cyber physical system approach, it builds on advanced analytics technologies that enable more customer centric business models. It also enables the reduction of human input in decisions. As a first example of prescriptive analytics in MRO planning, for example, production growth, the advanced TRL, that means the technology readiness level and their significant economic potential, which is documented by studies on MRO work scope planning. With regard to future visions, prescriptive maintenance approaches in business models such as automated maintenance and services, for example, blockchain based smart contracts related to all maintenance matters. That means self executing codes in a blockchain that automatically implements the terms of an agreement between parties. This approach can be elaborated furthermore to the usage of reliable sensoring systems, but also the application of validated software codes. With this lecture, I will close my lecturing on maintenance in the age of digitization.
