# Digital transformation
[MUSIC] Hello, in today's video, I would like to talk about digital transformation and what digital transformation means for the aerospace industry, and in particular for Airbus Defence and Space. My name is Peter Weckesser, I'm the digital transformation officer of Airbus Defence and Space.
Play video starting at ::25 and follow transcript0:25
Digitalization is a term that we hear very often and widely today. And actually what's called digital transformation is from my viewpoint the biggest transformative event that we have seen in industrial history.
Play video starting at ::41 and follow transcript0:41
And I would like to explain why I think that this is the case. Actually digital transformation is a transformation that happens in any industry.
Play video starting at ::52 and follow transcript0:52
It will impact or has impacted every company in these industries. And it will also impact every individual working in these companies, no matter in which function you work in these companies. I would like to give you a couple of examples why I believe this is so transformative.
Play video starting at :1:12 and follow transcript1:12
Other transformations have happened in manufacturing or in the office space, but digital transformation changes everything and it happens everywhere. Some examples that everybody knows is, for example, the digital transformation of retail or of entertainment. If you look at retail today, the whole ecosystem of retail has completely been transformed by companies like Amazon within a very short time frame of ten years. And this is not only impacting all the companies who are active in the retail value chain, but it has significantly changed the consumer behavior and probably will also continue to do so. The same is true actually for entertainment. If we look at the transformation phase from, well, digital media, from CD-ROMs, DVDs, to downloading digital content, to now streaming digital content. This is also transformation that has not only changed the ecosystem, has changed the customer behavior and the way how we consume digital media. And of course, it has also changed completely the landscape of companies participating in that. Now, these are two examples which are early adopters of digital transformation. I firmly believe that this digital transformation will take place in every industry and in every company. So I encourage everybody to embrace digital transformation. After the introduction to digital transformation in general, I would now like to talk about what does digital transformation mean in particular to Airbus Defence and Space. If we talk about digital transformation in Airbus Defence and Space, we usually look at two dimensions of digital transformation. One dimension is where we ask ourselves the questions, how do we get significantly better at what we do today? And what do we do? We design, we build, and then we help our customers to operate extremely complex products like aircraft, like satellites, and many other really cool things. The challenge in these products is that they have an extremely long life cycle of up to 50 years from the first idea for that product, the design, manufacturing phase. And then we have an extremely long operations phase of these products. The digital transformation in this core process, which we call product life cycle management, is really answering the question. How do we produce, develop the next product in half the time, half the cost, and at a significantly higher level of quality than the last product that we introduced into the market? And this is a question where we need to work on continuous process improvement. And some of these process improvements are pretty significant improvements. Because we will not write libraries of specifications anymore and then develop against these specifications. But we completely change our processes starting from model-based systems engineering approach, going into concurrent engineering of the various engineering disciplines, mechanical engineering, electrical engineering, software engineering. We will, in the future, more and more validate and certify our products in the virtual world. So that includes, of course, all virtual testing simulations, before we build the first real product. And actually what we do for the product, the virtual development of a product, is true also for the design and creation of our manufacturing equipment. This will also be done completely in the virtual world. It will be simulated, and the manufacturing process is also completely digital process in the creation phase. So at the end, we create digital models, three digital models, which we also call digital twins. A digital twin of the product, a digital twin of the manufacturing equipment, and a digital twin of the manufacturing process.
Play video starting at :5:31 and follow transcript5:31
Once we've created these digital twins, we have simulated all this, done a lot of certification also in the virtual world, we are really at the point where we built up our manufacturing equipment and finally manufacture the product.
Play video starting at :5:47 and follow transcript5:47
But this is not the end of the digital journey.
Play video starting at :5:51 and follow transcript5:51
Once we transfer the product or sell the product to our customer, of course, the most significant part of the life cycle of this product starts. The customer starts to operate the product, the product starts to create lots of data through that life cycle, which we feed back into our digital model. So we close the the digital loop from the real product to the digital model, compare the behavior of the real product in operation with all of our simulation. Which helps us to predict potential errors in the product, or even improve our digital models to design even better product in the next phase. This process is pretty disruptive already for us as an organization because it totally changes the way we operate. It changes the way how we work together between various engineering disciplines, it very much changes the way how we cooperate between engineering and manufacturing. And it very much changes the way how we work together between our customers who operate the products and various internal departments in Airbus, like engineering manufacturing and services. This will also have an impact on our organizational seller in the future that needs to be adapted towards these new business processes. And all this is being done following these principles that are introduced early, where we ask ourself the question, how do we get to market faster? How do we get to market with an even higher quality and a better cost position? Now, this is the right side on the slide that you can see, and this is called incremental improvements. Incremental for us means that we do not change our business model, but we stay within the boundaries of our existing business model but try to get better on a daily basis.
Play video starting at :7:51 and follow transcript7:51
Now, this is the one dimension of digital transformation, that we optimize our processes end-to-end and support these processes with the best-in-class tools that allow us to build the digital twins, and then a product that behaves like the digital twin. On the other hand side, we also need to look at the second dimension of digital transformation, which is even more disruptive and which is really shown on the left side of this slide in the background.
Play video starting at :8:19 and follow transcript8:19
Here we have to ask ourselves the question,
Play video starting at :8:23 and follow transcript8:23
is our business model still sustainable? Or do we need to find new ways how to meet our customers expectations? Do we have to develop completely new value propositions? Do we have to take our products to market in a completely different way or address completely new customer groups? So this is even more challenging for all mature organizations like Airbus than the first dimensions because it requires much more and outside in thinking. And I would like to share a few examples where competitors are already disrupting our business model today, and also areas where we try in Airbus Defence and Space to disrupt our own business model.
Play video starting at :9:8 and follow transcript9:08
But you can see on the slide is an example of a competitor, SpaceX. SpaceX has kind of revolutionalized the launcher industry by creating a business model of reusable launchers. This is something where most expert believed for a long time that this is not financially sustainable. SpaceX has proven to all these experts that it is and that they can get into a much more competitive position with this approach. This is very disruptive, and Airbus is more reacting to this competitive threat. There are a couple of other areas where we believe that we can proactively drive this disruption, and I want to mention a couple of examples here. Airbus has been active in satellite imaging for a couple of decades already. And this is a business which was mostly created for government customers. And with our capabilities of about a dozen satellites that we have in orbit with very sophisticated imaging capabilities. We are deeply convinced, and we see that from the customer demand, that we can commercialize these capabilities also outside of our existing government business and going into many commercial areas, like retail, like insurances, like agriculture. And commercialize the capability to a totally different industry, which requires different technical systems, but also a different go to market approach. This is why we have created a start-up in Berlin that we call UP42, which uses these satellite imaging capabilities, but takes them to market in non-government, in a non-defense industry. Which also requires a completely different approach how to partner with an ecosystem that is being created. And of course, interacting with customers that we had never interacted before. This is, of course, an approach which completely creates a new business model and a completely new value stream and business stream for Airbus.
Play video starting at :11:25 and follow transcript11:25
Two other examples that I would like to mention. All the world is talking about journey to cloud and how
Play video starting at :11:33 and follow transcript11:33
the use of public cloud services significantly improves IT operations. Now, in our defense business, we have the same challenges to get more productive everyday. But for sovereignty reasons, we cannot use any of the public cloud solutions. This is why we have developed at Airbus a cloud, a private cloud platform, which we call Infinity, which very much is being operated like a public cloud. The commercial model is very similar like a public cloud, it's a consumption-based model, which we use internally to significantly improve how we provision IT services within Airbus Defence and Space. And we now see that this is also being asked for from our defense customers. But also more and more emergency responders and other critical industries are very much interested in using this cloud which meets all sovereignty criteria that we have in Europe. And lastly, mentioning one example where we also go into a completely different market, where we provide aircraft position information in order to optimize aircraft routing, aircraft separation to customers like airlines and air traffic control. Where we are going more into software or data as a service business compared to our classical business, which is selling large and complex AirSense. And AirSense is one of these static activity, which also was started two, three years ago and is already creating now significant revenue for Airbus. So if you look at this second dimension, I hopefully was able to show that this is not only that, or digital transformation is not only helping us to optimize and significantly get better in our established business model. But it also allows us to create new value streams, new revenue streams, and at the end of the day, new business models that augment our existing business by completely new value propositions. I would like to summarize, digital transformation is essential for the future of Airbus and, of course, also for all the other industry. So I would encourage everybody to fully embrace digital transformation and look at digital transformation as an opportunity. I also would like to point out that most people initially think digital transformation is about all these digital tools that we introduce. But this is only one aspect, and usually this is not the hardest aspect or challenge of digital transformation. Digital transformation is very much about how do we find new value streams? How do we create new revenue streams? How do we optimize existing business processes? How do we get significantly better at what we do? How do we embrace the change of way of working? How do we embrace the development of people? How do we upskill our organization?
Play video starting at :15:1 and follow transcript15:01
And all these, this whole package is really relevant on digital transformation and this is what needs to be tackled by any organization. This is my short introduction into digital transformation at Airbus Defence and Space. Thank you very much for your attention. And I wish you all the best for your digital transformation and diverse in the future. [MUSIC]
Previously saved note: [MUSIC] Hello, in today's video, I would like to talk about digital transformation and what digital transformation means for the aerospace industry, and in particular for Airbus Defence and Space. My name is Peter Weckesser, I'm the digital transformation officer of Airbus Defence and Space. Digitalization is a term that we hear very often and widely today. And actually what's called digital transformation is from my viewpoint the biggest transformative event that we have seen in industrial history.. Press [CTRL + D] to delete the note

# Which impact has digitalisation on your life?
We do always have to remind ourselves that we are not only consumers of data, but also sources of data. So our whereabouts, our details and so forth are also of interest for others.
Play video starting at ::23 and follow transcript0:23
And we feel that we cannot always really protect ourselves from that kind of, well, data greed, if I may say so.
Play video starting at ::32 and follow transcript0:32
And I see that we all still have to get used to those roles, and we cannot say that we already are very proficient in that. >> Digitization had had a big impact already on communication. So how you communicate, how you can exchange data is drastically increased on private as well as on business. >> Many things are becoming easier, for instance booking a plane or booking a train, some are a bit more complicated. But at all things are very, very fast, and this is really a challenge. >> Digitization has really a good impact on my life. So I reached now really a paperless office and I have all my documents available online. I can access them from my office, at home, at the airport, in the train and that's really something which simplifies my work life and makes me really more efficient.
Play video starting at :1:30 and follow transcript1:30
So by digitization, we have much more data available, much more information. We have access to so many things, but of course we have to deal with this. We have to compare it, we have to work with it, and so I think it's a big advantage but also challenge, things are more complex.
Play video starting at :1:47 and follow transcript1:47
Digitization makes my life easier. I'm working at the University in Bamberg in the north of Bavaria, I'm working for a company in Munich in the south of Bavaria. I'm quite often on the road at the customer's place. So it's make me easier to access all the information, the documents, the processes, the tools I need. And I can use it on any location where I'm being, and I can use it on any device I have. So business live makes it quite easy, but also personal life. I stay in contact with my friends, with my family, with my child, with my grandchildren. So it makes situation quite easy, easy, easy.

# Risk of digitization
We see a dramatic evolution of functions actually, all over the place. You can buy such model aircraft drones already that are really depending on digital flight control, stuff like that. But even further on, there will be much more opportunities to use such systems in our daily lives. The risk and the challenges of digitisation is in the changing kind, how we work and how we perceive the world, all these things will change. Our brain is built for situations some 10,000 years ago, and we adapt to the new situation. I'm sure we can adapt to this, but we will adapt and this will change things. Work environment, workplaces, the kind of communication, the kind of perceiving the world, the kind of expectation, what we can expect, what we will do, what we'll need. Our goals, can we satisfy our needs will change. Digitisation requires an increase in security in order to protect the privacy of the citizens and to ensure the proper use in various safety-related applications. Therefore, one of the big challenges in the future is really to find the right means in order to increase security. In general, we have to consider that on the one hand side, to share information and knowledge very easily is quite good. But we also have to keep our knowledge somehow separated. I see a certain risk that a number of papers and publications and statements are now available online and it's a slightly more difficult to have an overview on what is important, what is not.

# introductory words
Welcome to the lecture Space and Digitalization. My name is Professor Förstner. I am from the Bundeswehr University here in Munich, and I am the head of the space technology Institute. Here today, we are at the space test centre of IABG. It's the national largest test centre. And for example, in the back, you see a big test chamber where space environment can be simulated. And satellites and equipment can be tested. The lecture Digitalization and Space is divided in four parts. We will start with a general introduction into digitalization,
Play video starting at ::50 and follow transcript0:50
followed by application and services. So looking how the services and the products from spacecraft, from satellites are influenced by digitalization. The third part, we'll have a look at manufacturing, development, and operation of satellites, because not only the products of the satellites. But also how we design and build satellites will be different in the future due to digitalization.
Play video starting at :1:18 and follow transcript1:18
And the last part is about new risks and threats which are introduced by digitalization. Of course, also, this we have to have a look and be aware of all these new risks we are facing. [MUSIC]

# introduction

So let's start. This is a general introduction. First of all, I want to point out what digitalization is not. Digitalization is not if I'm using a computer. In the spacecraft development business, we're using computers for many years, digital data for simulations. But this is not what digitalization means really today. So for example, if I run a simulation in my design process, I have digital data, of course, from computer simulations. I put this data in a Word document, all digital, I send it via email to colleague, he reads it and maybe copies these numbers he needs into his own simulation. So everything is digital but still this is not digitalization. This is just using let's say digital devices for processes that we have done also in the past maybe withe paper. So digitalization is more than this. Then another thing that's important to mention, in the literature encounter two types of words. One is digitization and the other one is digitalization. It's a small difference in spelling and it has also a slightly different meaning. If you hear about digitization, it basically means transformation of analog data or physical items into a digital representation. So if you scan a document in to Word with a scanner, this is digitizing a document from paper in to a digital representation. But digitization does not stop. At this point, you can go further and maybe using a text recognition software which recognizes the scanned words and then you can use a software maybe to count words or search for specific word in the document. So digitization means transformation from analog data, from physical items into a digital representation and applying if needed some automization. So having automated processes, that's digitization. If you talk about digitalization, it goes beyond digitization. Digitization is a prerequisite for digitalization. But digitalization also means that you are changing your ways of interaction, your ways of communication with your colleagues, with your customers because you are using digital data. So you need digitized data and then your working flow is changed completely. You are not doing as you would have done it before. You will change your workflow completely. An example could be if I want to order a book today, I take my mobile phone, I can unlock it with my fingerprint. So this is already an interaction between physical and digital items. I go to the Amazon app, I get already offers due to my past ordered books. It has been analyzed what I like and then I get proposals, which books I may like and want to buy. So I want one, I click on it, I buy it paying with PayPal, all digital. Eventually, it's shipped and maybe in the future even delivered by a drone or if I'm all digital, I order the e-book and can read it on my mobile phone. So this is an all digital process, but it's also a digitalized process because it's a completely different way of buying a book than it was 20 years ago. So that's roughly the difference between digitization, digitalization. Digitalization is the integration of digital data of humans, of manual processes in a mix, but is a newly adopted workflow or process. I want to try to visualize a little bit what digitalization means and therefore, let's consider three items. We have physical items, physical entities, the physical world around us. They are the humans. We interacting with the physical world. Since the invention of computers, we also have the digital world or the digital entities. These three entities and the relation of these three entities is changing and has been changing over time and this is what I want to show in a simple sketch, in a simple model. So let's start. We have the physical items
Play video starting at :5:18 and follow transcript5:18
and we as humans, we always had some connection to the physical items. Interaction, of course. We are living in this world and then computers have been invented and we have the digital entities. First, we had a relative, let's say weak interaction with the digital world. If you're using computers basically to do massive calculations, the computers could do much faster than we humans and we could call this the age of calculation. That's basically what we use computers in the beginning. There was a rather weak interaction in the beginning between the digital entities and the physical entities. Then this introduction of more and more computers, the Internet was invented and was spreading over the world. This new computers, smartphones, tablets, we got a more and more connection all over the world via the Internet and this led to the fact that these three entities, basically were coming closer together. We can call this actually the age of networks that is now the humans, the physical items, and the digital entities. We are coming more closer together and especially we humans, we're much more interacting. It's a digital world so we had a very strong interaction. This is the digital world in the age of networks. There's of course still, so connection between humans and the physical world. But also more and more, we had a connection between the digital world and the physical world. So this was and still is the age of networks. Now, what we see currently a transition and networks are established in a good part of the world, not all over the world yet, but now data become more and more important, and you can call this actually the age of data. So data, some say is the new oil. This is where you can make lots of money if you are the owner data like Google or Facebook, they earn a lot of money because they own Data. So what's happening in our model? If you look at this new age of data again, here the humans, we have the physical items and the digital items are now almost blending this the physical and the human world. So there's a strong connection now between all these three entities, and this is basically what currently digitalization means. This really, this blending of physical, of the physical world of the humans and the digital world. This is very old. Maybe just a brief outlook, what comes in the future? I mean, nobody knows. But if you look at the model, there's something that's still could happen, and that is if you, if you look closer, the humans and the physical items are not yet blending. But in the future, this may happen. So also the blending between the physical items and the humans may take place, and we see this already by first attempts to implant sensors into the human body, which then transmits blood pressure or something like this. So I guess maybe in the future, we may become cyborgs and we are all connected, and this is maybe then the world and the Internet of everything and everybody. So digitalization of course, depends on technology, and there can be three types of technology identified which are crucial for the future digitalization of industry and the world. First of all, this is technology, which allows the interaction between the physical world and the digital world. This is things like Internet of things that is building up slowly, 3D printing, so really transferring a digital model into a physical model. Sensors for data collection, of course, are important to build a database. Virtual reality, augmented reality helps us to interact services with the digital world and the physical world. Robotics clearly is the technology needed, and now very important is the technology of artificial intelligence, which of course is also gaining a lot of momentum currently. All this will bring physical and digital world together and also have the effect that we go from automization to autonomy. So our equipment, they'll become more and more autonomous and maybe able to do decisions on its own. The second technology which is needed is related to data integrity. Why is this the case? We are living in the age of digital data, and one thing compared to analog data is that it is much easier to fake or to modify digital data than it is with analog data. So what we need is to be able to trust our digital data is technology which really guarantees the integrity of our digital data, and therefore technologies like blockchain, or quantum cryptography, or [inaudible] cybersecurity technology is very important, and I believe that this is one of the most important technologies to really implement digitalization. Because if you can't trust our data, we can't use it for our daily life and also for safety critical applications. Then the last group of technology, which for sure is relevant for digitalization, is all the information and communication technology. Why? Because we have to handle huge amounts of data and we need the technology to handle the data and we need technology to transmit the data. Therefore, broadband communication, 5G is important. Laser communication is higher, data throughput is important. Cloud computing will be relevant in the future. Big data analytics, storage, mass memory technology to store all this massive amount of data will be of high importance and also of very high importance and this relates to space is communication satellites. Communication satellites are not only affected by digitalization, but communication satellites and satellites and channel are also an enabler for digital technology and digitalization. Because in particular, communication satellites are very powerful means to transmit data all over the world, and therefore space, and the space sector is also an enabler for digitalization. Coming to the space sector, it must be said that the space sector in terms of digitalization, this maybe a little bit behind compared to terrestrial industry. There's industry here on Earth which is much further, let's say in this process of digital transformation. But space, the space business in general is a quite conservative business, used to be in the past and therefore, the processes are a little bit slower. But it started. So the digitalization finds its way into the space sectors and all areas are affected. Products, processes, and also business models are changing due to this transformation and as a result, we have changing paradigms. Paradigms which were valuable in the last decades have to change, new ways of development, new ways of manufacturing, new ways of operating satellites, and also new ways of how we distribute our services, and also new services, completely new services which were not possible without digitalization. Let's say the core of digitalization is always user centric, user adaptive services and applications and satellites in the future will just be a commodity to provide the relevant data to deliver this new services. So this shall be the end of the first introduction of the digitalization and space lecture, and in the next part, you will have a closer look on the application and services and how they will change you to digitalization.

#  Space Based Products & Services
Welcome to the second part of the lecture. In this part, we will have a look at how space-based services and products are changing due to digitization. As pointed out before, digitization is heavily based on data and processing of data, and it is user centered, user adaptive. This is the business of the Silicon Valley, and I like to call this the Silicon Valley approach, which brought us many disruptions. In the terrestrial field, we saw these taxes and Uber, we saw these hotels and Airbnb, Books Amazon, the news business with Twitter and so on. There's a long list of businesses which really have been disrupted by new services, user centered services, due to digitization. All these services are based on data, and processing of this data is algorithms analyzing this data, and then providing services to the users, to the customers at any time in any location. So this is the business model and this is where these companies make the big revenue with these services. This is the point where the space and satellites come into the game because satellites are very good means to collect data, Earth observation, or to transmit data to these communication satellites. These companies from the Silicon Valley, basically they realized, these communication satellites, they're perfect means to connect the world because they want everybody to be connected to their computers to collect all the data and make money out of them. So they entered the space sector, but they entered it with their own spirit, rather coming from the information and communication technology field with it's fast technology turnarounds, [inaudible] poll checks, and of course, also new ways of financing poll checks. They enter the space sector and basically, they're changing the way business is turning to have using new business models and also now the established players in the space sectors are realizing that they have to change and adapt to this new way of doing business and we can see this, for example, in a vertical integration of the market that spacecraft manufacturers not always sell the spacecraft's, but sometimes keep them and rather sell the data of the spacecraft, because with this so-called downstream services and the data, you can sometimes make much more money than just selling the spacecraft. So this is how new pace was born. This is what we call new space, then the young and wild guys from the Silicon Valley basically entered the space sector and really changed the way things are done.
Play video starting at :3:23 and follow transcript3:23
So focus is on services, I said, and these services rely on heavily processed data. Nowadays, the user is not interested in raw data or something, he's interested in derived information, and these derived information, of course, is a difficult and complex task to transform data from satellites, maybe data from other sources to the service, the information the user wants. To do so, we basically need a translator, a middle layer, that is between the raw data coming from the satellites and the users. This middle layer needs to know what the user wants, but it also needs to know what satellites can provide in data and it needs to know how to transfer this data by adding contextual additional data maybe, so that the service for the user can be produced. We see this in the market that many companies are currently starting up and has been starting up also in the recent years, which exactly serve as this middle layer, as this translator between the pure scientific or raw data and the user, which just once the service easy-to-use rapidly.
Play video starting at :4:45 and follow transcript4:45
What we can see is that data from different sources are integrated, and this integration what we call multi-modal data, I think it's even pushing more the limits what we can do and improves the performance and the usability of this services that we not only use data from satellites, but we combine them, maybe with datas from a network of sensors or datas from aircraft and so on. So this data fusion is a very important task for this middle layer and producing more and more information that is useful for the customer. The technology is improving for doing all this. For example, information technology, computer processing power, but also artificial intelligence is improving a lot. But if you talk about satellite data, there's also in addition, some other characteristics which are highly relevant so that we have suitable data and what is relevant. This is H of the information, how old the data are? What's the quality of the data? How reliable are the data? What's the coverage, and how available are the data? So this is really a quality characteristics of data coming from satellites, and only if this is adequate, they can be used for this new services to fuse maybe these other data from count-based sensors and services. For example, Earth observation satellites produce a lot of data even nowadays, terabytes of data every day. Communication satellites transmit a bunch of data every second all over the world, and we have also a navigation satellites which give us many, many information on localization but also on timing. Therefore, we could also say that data is the new oil, but satellites are the drilling rigs and the pipelines to get the oil and to transfer the oil to the places all over the world.
Play video starting at :7:9 and follow transcript7:09
But due to this new approach and the high agility this business is needing, we have to change our approaches, which were established in the last decades in the space sector, and we have to change these approaches. We need more flexibility, we need more agility, the activity of our business, of our satellites, of our payloads. So this business, they don't want development cycles of five or 10 years. They want short developments cycles. Short time from starting of ordering a satellite, till deployment in space or in the orbit. So we need short life cycles, we need low cost lives all over the life cycle. Of course, we have to bring the price down so that it is affordable for many people in the world. Due to this, we see a change in how missions are done. What we first of all see is that there's a trend form, one big can do everything satellite to smaller satellites. So rather than having a multi- instrument, multi-purpose satellite, which can weigh several tons, we see a trend to smaller satellites which are more specialized, and at the same time, due to the fact that the satellites are smaller, less complex, which makes them cheaper, and also a faster development cycles are possible, we see that we have not only smaller satellites but smaller and more. So we go from one big to many small satellites. That's basically the trend we are seeing, and going from one satellite to many satellites has some significant advantages. We can have fractionated systems, distributed systems, and for example, improving performance due to more sensors in different locations. This what I like to call network dynamic systems, have also advantages in terms of flexibility. We can scale the system by adding or removing satellites. Since the satellites are small, launching them is also not too expensive. You can use smaller launchers for them. It's a good maintainability, so if there's a bad performing satellite in the constellation or a failed satellite in the constellation, we just replace this satellite with a new one. We can gradually update our constellation with new technologies. So gradually replacing one satellite after the other and still having a operational constellation, which of course is much more difficult with the big satellites which are almost old when they're launched. Because we have maybe five years of development time and these smaller satellites they can be more reactive in changing much more reactive in changing markets, and as said, this is a user adaptive market. This constellations are robust. So if I have hundreds of satellites, if one fails, the mission still can go on and maybe even without any degradation in performance. So it's very robust, these missions. Due to this, we can also accept a little bit higher risk for the single spacecraft. If there's one of a kind spacecraft, you must be very clear and very sure that it is working. If you have hundreds of small spacecrafts, we can allow a little bit higher risk for this smaller spacecrafts and we can do with such many spacecrafts mission architectures. We can do things we can't do with a single spacecraft. For example, doing as tomography these clouds, using two spacecrafts and detecting the shape of clouds. For example, like computer tomography you know from a medical diagnostics. So this network dynamic systems formations, swarms, constellations, however you want to call it. They allow us to react much better to the user, to the user adaptive markets to changes what is needed on the market. This is a big advantage and they are also flexible with many, I have a good coverage and I have probably also a lower age of data because there are many satellites, I can revisit several points on Earth more often than with a single space spacecraft. So there are several advantages in this transition from going one big satellite to many small satellites. So I wanted to give you an example now how constellations can be used to reflect the requirements of the users and this is now an example for an Earth observation mission, a constellation of just eight satellites or applied small constellation. If I, for example, want to have a high spatial coverage, so really flying over all points on Earth, maybe within one day or two days, depending on my requirements, I can use such a consolation. This is a simple example, just a satellites flying around earth. If I now switch to the count tracks. So this shows the lines where the satellites have flown over points on Earth. This is now just 24 hours. So we see the coverage of eight of these eight satellites which are flying around Earth in their specific orbits. So this is now the coverage over 24 hours. You can see that this in one day we have quite a good coverage, it was just eight satellites. It's very small constellation or I can maybe take pictures of almost all points on Earth if I like. So this can be one application, but maybe the user says, I'm not so much interested in every point, every day, but rather in one point but maybe with a short time gap in-between. So a sequence of pictures, maybe it was just 20 minutes time period in between. So you would design your constellation a little bit different, and I show this here. So this is a constellation of just four satellites and they are basically following each other. You have to adjust the orbital planes a little bit due to the rotation of Earth and drifts of the orbital planes. But this is the task of the mission designers to come up here with the best solution. If you now look at the ground tracks of this constellation, you see that the satellites basically follow each other and fly over the same point four times because we have four satellites in this constellation. So you saw there's the first satellite taking a picture and then the next three satellites also flying over the same spot and can take a picture of the same spot. So you have a high revisit time how we call this, and a small temporal gap between pictures. If you want to combine this, if you are a customer and saying, okay, I want global coverage within one day and a higher temporal resolution, a higher revisit time, revisit frequency, then you have to combine, for example, these two types of constellations. Of course, this results in more satellites required that are in orbit. Another challenge in such a type of consolation is that you have to transmit a huge amount of data. If you go into this direction that you really want to have a picture of every point, every day on Earth, you generate a huge amount of data. This needs to be handled, which is quite difficult. There's this trend going in more and more temporal resolution, higher resolution, that means higher revisit times, but maybe less resolution in the images. So we don't need the 10 centimeter resolution necessarily, but rather one meter is enough. But I wanted visit very high repetition time. This is really the trend. What can be seen, especially from the new players, the Silicon Valley guys, so to say, they are pursuing this direction and maybe in the future, we will really have of a permanent vision of our globe and we also see already that satellites have the capability to take short video clips. So it's not just still images anymore, it's also short video clips from space of certain spots on Earth. So eventually, maybe in the future if you have a total coverage and real-time video of the globe every day and every time. The challenge, of course, is the huge amount of data they generate. If I really go to this point where I say I want any point, any day means I can take a picture of any point on earth at any day or every point every day. Then of course, I generate a huge amount of data. This is a big challenge, of course, for this constellations to transmit all this data to the ground. If I have this data available, I can now generate this edit value, this derived information, which is eventually interesting for the user. The user is not so much interested in the whole picture. We see that this Google Earth, we can have this nicely everyday by of course, the paying customer is interested in services and derived information. What could this be? Just as an example, I could make pattern analysis of traffic, how ships are moving, how cars are moving. I can then add contextual data, which type of car this is, is it a truck, or a small car or a train, and so on? Examples of services which are already existing. So this is nothing coming in the future. This is already existing services. It's like for sample that I count cars on parking lots of retailers and over the day I can see if the parking lot is more empty or full up. So I can actually analyze how many customers are in the shop over the day. So this is really something that is used nowadays as a service and sold to customers. This type of analysis, you can gauge the filling of oil tanks, big oil tanks therefore lift which goes up and down depending on how much oil is in the oil tanks.This can be seen from space. If this is done globally, we actually know how much oil globally is stored, and we see also how much oil is sold. If I track the ships which transport these oils, I may even know there to where this oil is sold. So this is also another service currently offered. I can track traffic, a set of trucks to regions or to a industrial facility and counting how many trucks are coming to this facility or leaving this facility. By this I know how good the business is running for this facility or what's the economic strengths of region by just analyzing transportation traffic, these trains these trucks or aircraft, depending what I'm looking for. Another example is that I can monitor construction sites. If big buildings are constructed and built, the competitors could check how good the others are doing or they can supervise or monitor the progress of their own construction sides if they are distributed all over the world. So this is another application of this earth observation data together with other data. Again data fusion, data analytics is very important. Again the cost play a role and the availability, how old the data are? Usually the customers are more interested in actual data than data that is five weeks old. So this all needs to be balanced. This is the big challenge for this new businesses, this companies who's selling this services to find the right balance and what the customer really needs. As I said already, connected to all this is huge amount of data and communication satellites are a very good means to distribute this data all over the world, but this results on new requirements.So we need high bandwidths on the communication satellites, we need low latency of the data It should be quick transmission of data, and we want global connectivity. Otherwise, Internet of things from machine to machine communication is not working. If you don't have this global connectivity, or hyper-connectivity as we may call it. So the goal for communication satellites is really connect every point on earth or every device, which is millions or billions of devices with any other device every day at every point in time. This is a big challenge because we need a global coverage. Each device has to see at least one communication satellite. We need satellite to satellite communication to transmit data from one side of the earth all the way to the other side of the earth. This is where the so-called mega constellations come into the game,and you've probably heard of them. One-web or also space X wants to launch these mega constellations. These mega constellations are communication satellites, they are there to connect the world. Why? Because these companies like Google, Amazon and Facebook, they make their money because the world is connected and all the data that are transmitted are analyzed, collected, and then used for services you are all aware of.
Play video starting at :22:40 and follow transcript22:40
Therefore Satellite Communication is an enabler for digitization. It is highly important for us networks of sensors for autonomous mobility, if I want to introduce autonomous cars they need connectivity to the internet to servers, they need satellites, and navigation data. So autonomous mobility in general is highly dependent on space segments, being at navigation satellites, being it communication satellites, or augmented services, service traffic advisories form real-time images from space. So there's many connections. Communication satellites can serve as a back hole for mobile communication or as a redundant communication system. In times of disaster where the terrestrial infrastructure is destroyed, space communications still works if you have a terminal space mobile phone you still can communicate via satellites even in a disaster area. So it has a higher relevance this sector of space communication in particular for resilient highly reliable connectivity like required for safety critical services. This finds its way already in the technology of communication satellites. We see a trend going towards software-defined functionalities on communication satellites, like software defined radio. You probably heard already, but more functionalities will be more and more defined by software rather than by hardware. Why? Because this gives higher flexibility. With the software I can upload updates and then change my software. This is exactly this user adaptive approach we need that we can change basically the functionality of our payload if the market is changing. We see technology of high data rate throughput 5G in space or laser communication, a very important topic currently really using light and lasers to transmit data between satellites or from satellites down to earth. The last technology which is of high importance and has to find its way onto the satellites is clearly ensuring the integrity of data. As pointed out already in the first part of this lecture, block-chain technology, quantum encryption, cyber security technologies are highly important so that we can make sure that we have a high integrity and a high trustworthiness of data that are transmitted over to satellites.

# development, production, and operations
Welcome to the third part of the lecture Space and Digitization. This part is focusing now on the manufacturing, development process and operation of satellites. Also, this is changing not just the services provided by satellites, but also the way we develop satellites and the way we operate satellites in the future. There are new requirements due to the new missions as been seen in Part 2. This new demographic requirements are mass-production, fast development, short times from development until orbit deployment, effective development management, and low-cost. So these are the requirements for the manufacturing of this small but many satellites. But also on the operation side, we have new requirements coming up. We have to operate hundreds or even thousands of satellites simultaneously which is a big challenge for operations in orbit upgrade, in orbit update, might be necessary for these satellites. Low-latency data delivery. So the operators have to deliver the data very quickly to the users. Again, low cost operations is still a quite costly thing in the space business, and also for hundreds and thousands of satellites, of course the cost per satellite in operations has to come down. To mention another aspect which is not the focus of this lecture but to bring up all these satellites, we also need the launchers that are capable of doing this, and we currently see also a quite dynamic markets in the launcher business, and many companies are looking into so-called mini launchers. That is, you don't have not just the big, huge rockets but also smaller rockets which can launch these small satellites much more rapidly, much more flexible and cheaper. So this is a reaction of the launcher market to this new market for many small satellites instead one big satellite. This is a dynamic development ongoing which is not the focus of this lecture, but it should be mentioned because it is a follow-on effect of the digitization.
Play video starting at :2:39 and follow transcript2:39
If you look on the processes, how classically satellites have been developed, they are huge, they are complex and one of a kind. Of course, we have to make sure that they really working and therefore, many tests are done for verification, for validation. Here I am in one of the largest test centers in Europe for space simulations and testing of spacecraft, and this is necessary to really make sure that this peak, one of a kind spacecraft really function flawlessly in space for 10 or 15 years without maintenance. There's no chance to do maintenance, but this is costly. It is clear if I'm building hundreds and thousands of satellites, I can't go through this process of testing each satellite on each level. This would just be not possible so we need new approaches in designing, developing spacecrafts, manufacturing and testing, which means verification and validation of the satellites. All these needs to change and digitization basically has found its way already in this area, which we call Industry 4.0, So on the terrestrial industry, this digital transformation is already gaining momentum and the business is changing and this Industry 4.0 for sure is what the space business also has to do and started already to do. This topic, Industry 4.0 is a huge developing topic which is far too much to cover here in this lecture, which is of course focused on space. So I encourage you to look through the Internet. There's lots of material in the Internet and there's also in this lecture series, there's a lecture about Industry 4.0. So please also have look at this lecture there. I will trust you give some indications, what it could look like if this transformation from Industry 3.0 to Industry 4.0 is taking place.
Play video starting at :5: and follow transcript5:00
It depends on technology only if we have the technology, which is a digital technology, part of this digitization process. Only then we can do this transformation and in the graph on the screen, you see all relevant technologies displayed, which is Internet of things, machine to machine communication, cybersecurity, augmented reality, big data, autonomous robotics, additive manufacturing, 3D printing. Simulations, very important, especially important for us in space, because many things we can't test, we only can simulate, system integration, which equals to systems engineering. The systems becoming more and more complex, combined cyber-physical systems and we need a very good, strong systems engineering to handle these systems and another technology very important is cloud computing in the future to handle all the data. So this is the technology we require for our transformation from Industry 3.0, as you can see here on this slide on the screen, that's the old industry as we have it now. It is a hardware-based. Functions are bound to hardware and there's hierarchical communication and the products are more or less disconnected from the production process itself. So that's what we have. That's the classical 3.0 industry, but the transformation to Industry 4.0, is this going to networks connecting the products, connecting the production process, connecting the users in the network and you see what we have here, we have functions distributed over the network. We have smart factories which are connected to smart products. In the future, we have no hierarchies, really [inaudible] and network and his is how the transformation will look like once it is fully done going from Industry 3.0 to Industry 4.0. How can this be implemented? If we look at the next slide, I won't go into the details, please take your time offline, so to say, have a closer look into these graphs. There's lots of information in them. But as you can see, it's basically the first step is connecting unconnected things, having sensors and actuators bringing together physical world and the digital world. Then we have datas that need to be managed in the production process for the smart factories. We have this internal services, internal systems, we have to build up on digital devices and connectivity, is then the next level having advanced services applications, new capabilities which are developing from this opportunities digitization is giving us, and out of this of course, we can develop new businesses due to this connection between the production process and the products. So this smart products will have a connection to the company who produced it, so we can have this Internet of services for example. So there's new things happening if we implement Industry 4.0. To do so, we also have to introduce new development approaches, new design and development and manufacturing approaches. So what does it mean? We have maybe in the future, we have digital product lifecycle management, very important. The whole product lifecycle is really managed in a digital wave if HI process is being flexible. You have artificial intelligence supporting us in optimization of design. Digital models, digital twins connected digital models, model-based product definition. So you see, that the borders between physical world and digital world really blending and disappearing in this Industry 4.0. We may have 3D massive model visualization, virtual assembly integration, and test how we call it in the space business AIT. Really first trying it, this Virtual Reality to assemble the spacecraft, and only then really building a real thing, and then also for dealing with the complexity of the systems, we may have this transition to model-based, simulation-based systems engineering, which is this discipline in engineering which really is responsible to handle complexity of such systems.
Play video starting at :10:15 and follow transcript10:15
The new design principles of Industry 4.0 is on this slide. Again, it's many information on this, so take your time offline studying the information here, but just the major points on this slide in terms of design. New design principles it's really interoperability, inter-connectivity of the machines, of the products, virtualization, virtual entities. As we learned already, this is really a blending autonomous decision, maybe also powered by our production machines, that they really decide on themselves how to proceed. Decentralization networks will come in to our factories real-time capabilities, so that we have maybe predictive maintenance, so that the computational intelligence realizes if a machine is not really working fine, and may fail soon. So it warns us already in advance, that maybe we have to maintain, to do maintenance with this machine, and then also this service orientation, really connecting the products back to the factory for service interactions with the users, and also modularity and scalability will be very important design principle in the future, so that we can be again, flexible, user centric, user adaptive again. So we need to be flexible, and this of course, can be done by modularity and scalable systems. But this new approaches of Industry 4.0 was not only valuable for the new types of spacecraft and new types of missions, but also for the traditional spacecrafts, the one big, highly complex spacecraft. This new approaches can be very beneficial, and this is seen by a new initiative by ESA, the European Space Agency, which is called design to produce, which is exactly the same thing. It's the transition from the classical Industry 3.0 to the smart factory, and you see here, symbolically, how they envisage this if you have the classic approach, paper-based, so to say, still maybe saved on servers, but this can lead to confusion. We don't know what's real configuration and binds a lot of resources to clarify this confusion maybe during integration, we realize that something is not working and then we have to go back. So this is the old way, the new way, if you have this connected digital models or digital twins, digital product lifecycle management with a much clearer path of information, and a connection, and also a feedback. So if the virtual integration team realizes during virtual assembly and integration that something is not working, they can feedback this to the design team and they can change it, and only then I build the real spacecraft. This of course, avoids many misunderstandings and loops, and therefore frees resources of the experts to concentrate on the tricky parts. So all this side effects in figuring out what's now wrong and right, hopefully is reduced a lot by this new approaches, and frees resources so that they can concentrate on the tricky parts, which are still many tricky parts. If you build a spacecraft, I can tell you it's always not easy and difficult, and if we have resources freed to take care of this difficult parts, this is already a big step forward.
Play video starting at :14:18 and follow transcript14:18
But not only the design principles are changing. If we looking at this huge amount of spacecrafts, of the constellations in terms of thousands of spacecrafts that need to be produced, we need to have mass production. Therefore, we have to introduce completely new ways of manufacturing, like line production, which we are not at all used to in space business. At the most, I guess we produced 20-30, if it's satellite navigation spacecrafts. But really producing hundreds and thousands of spacecraft in a line. This is something we didn't do in the past, so we really have to introduce, we have to learn this, and line production means automation, means modernization, additive manufacturing, collaborative robots, cobots, or it is called smart tools, context-sensitive tools, very important. Imagine you have a machine and electric screw driver, and you're tightening a screw, and this smart tool knows by geo-location which screw you are tightening, and then adjust automatically to the right torque, for example. So the technician doesn't have to take care, okay, which is the right tok for this screw? It just connects to the server and it knows, okay, it's this screw, it needs this tok and automatically adjusts to it. So smart tools will help the technicians. Augmented reality, the same thing. Wearing goggles, and working at the satellite, and maybe becoming displayed important data in your augmented reality goggles, so to say. We have automated inspection, so the satellites are inspected if they are assembled in the correct way, automatically by image recognition, algorithms, artificial intelligence, and they recognize if everything is on the right spot. For example, an automatic testing. So the satellites are automatically connected with tests connectors, and then some automated tests are run. So it's not that everything is done by technicians anymore, but many things are automated in this new type of manufacturing. Also, as I mentioned, this preventive, protective, maintenance also of the machines itself. This has been implemented recently by OneWeb. They build up such a production line with all these tools I just mentioned, smart tools, automated inspection and so on. It's all described in this picture. So take your time for a closer look into this picture, it's very interesting what they implemented and it is important to mention that OneWeb Production is completely paperless. There's not a single sheet of paper, everything is digital, smart factory industry 4.0, that's what we see here. Another points to mention in terms of changing paradigms in the Production is that for this constellations, many small satellites, low-cost is important, and low-cost can be achieved by using commercial off-the-shelf parts, or we call this. So parts that are not specifically space qualified. Space qualified equipment is quite expensive and a tedious process. So of course, it takes time and cost. Therefore, using commercial off-the-shelf parts, lowest cost, but it's risky. Why? Because they are not qualified for the space environment, and the harsh space environment could result in a reduction in lifetime and reliability of this commercial off-the-shelf parts. But as I said before, the constellations, having many thousands of satellites, I can take a higher risk for the single satellite to fail. The mission is still robust. Even so, the satellites are maybe less robust than before, let's say low risk approached with pursuing these traditional spacecrafts. So we can accept higher risk, and therefore we can accept commercial off-the-shelf parts for this spacecraft. Well still, not every part you still have to use a certain type of selection, and what is also now establishing is what is called software-based ideation hardening. Especially for electronics, space ideation is a quite difficult environments, resulting in many failures and breaks of electronical parts. This, nowadays, in the times of digitalization, software defined functionalities, you remember, allows us to introduce software-based ideation hardening, which again allows us to use more and more commercial off-the-shelf parts on spacecraft. And the last point to mentioning in terms of new approaches into development and manufacturing is that we then need new approaches for verification and validation. In the past, with one spacecraft, we had to do many tests and many levels to verify that everything works fine. Of course, we can't do this with 1000 or 2000 satellites of the constellations that we have to find new ways, and one option, would be to do a type qualification. So I take the first model of my satellite and do the classical full-fledged verification, qualification, validation tests, but then let's say the design and the implementation, the material is qualified. The whole spacecraft is qualified as a type, that's why it is called type qualification, and then for the followings 9,999 spacecraft, so to say, I don't do for each spacecraft, it is very tedious testing, but I'd rather monitor the quality of the manufacturing process itself. So we bring in quality to the spacecraft by high quality of the manufacturing process and by this, we make sure if you have a continuous constant quality of the manufacturing process, the satellites should have the same quality as our first model, which has been fully tested and proven that it works. So with this approach, we have one qualification, verification testing as usual, and for all other satellites, we basically have to do an acceptance testing or workmanship testing so that it works and nothing is broken, but no full-fledged verification. We have to see how this will be implemented. This is not implemented yet. This is changing paradigms and we will see how our subspace businesses accepting such new approaches also in verification and validation. Another important aspect is the operation of satellites. As mentioned already in the beginning of this part, operations has these requirements of 1000 satellites simultaneously to be monitored, to be controlled, and to be handled if there's a failure. So we can't do this in the classical way, maybe even miss 247 shifts. This is too expensive for thousands of satellites. So we have to have new approaches, and one important approach for sure is autonomy support on ground supporting the operators, but also autonomy on-board of the spacecraft so that they can more and more decide themselves what to do in case of a failures. So predictive failure detection, fault management can be done autonomously on board of spacecraft in the future, but also activity planning, health monitoring, and data management. This is something more and more could be done in the future autonomously, first, maybe on ground, later on the satellites, and there's a trend on the terrestrial artificial intelligence business that the legalisms get more performance every day basically, and there's also this push of the deep learning networks, of the intelligence to the edge or they call this. So really bringing the newline networks, for example, to the edge devices. Edge devices are my mobile phone, for example, and a mobile phone, of course, has low power resources and low computational resources and that's more or less the same problem we are having on satellites. The FBI restricted in power and computation resources, so we can't run massive populations. But this trend now on Earth, that artificial intelligence is coming to the edge devices, which means they need to be slim. There is a chance that we now can more and more implements such algorithms also on spacecraft. A challenge. If you want to apply this high grade of autonomy on spacecraft is how do we verify and validate this algorithms? They are not so much deterministic as the software used to be in the past. So the classical verification approaches for software on spacecrafts, are probably not the right approach for this new type of software which is based on computational intelligence and also there we have to invent new methods, maybe statistical methods, to verify that the software can handle a satellite in any situation. You have to see this is for sure an area of research for the future, and still a long way to go to bring up high grade of autonomy to the spacecraft. Another requirement to operations is in-orbit upgrade, in-orbit update of satellites. So using more and more software defined functions, then the upgrade and update is easy. We just can make a software patch loading and up to the satellite and it's updated. So that's the simple part, but we may also think about in-orbit servicing, maybe before refueling a satellite, prolonging the lifetime in orbit, even thinking of spare part production in space. So a servicing spacecraft has a 3D printer on board. You can print a specific spare part. Notice that this is coming in the future, or you could think of modular spacecrafts which can be reconfigured in space. A spacecraft built of small standardized functional modules is different functions, but standardized interfaces and you just can pluck them like Lego together and then produce a new type of satellite, and this has been investigated by a German study team for the German Space Agency. This concept is called Ibis, you see it here on the screen. So this is really a spacecraft, highly modular and can be reconfigured in space. We will see if this is the way to roll in the future. But it's clearly, it will be a new approach in operations of spacecraft. Then the last requirement to mention is this requirement for low latency of data transmission. So the data shall come to the user faster and faster. How could this be done? One approach is that we give the data owner a more direct access to the spacecraft's, and one model could be that the classical operation centers, they just provide the expensive infrastructure like the big antennas and computers and so on, and then provide an easy to use software to the user, or Graphical User Interface, which is intelligent enough to help the user to control the payload on a spacecraft or even the complete spacecraft without doing wrong things. So we're having an intelligence software behind so that the user cannot break anything, and the user just directly controls his spacecraft and maybe in the future, who knows, I can control my spacecraft with the new app on my mobile phone, so all digital spacecraft operations. The future will show where we will go, but it's for sure a very interesting time currently, as all this changing paradigms in how we manufacture and operate spacecrafts. This brings me to the end of this part and in the last part of this lecture, we will have a look at the new threats and risks of digitalization in the space sector.

# Risks & Threats
Welcome to the fourth part of the lecture space and digitalization. In this part, we will have a look on the risks and threats which are introduced by the digitalization of space. And there are different types of risks that are coming into the game, first of all, if you look at the development process. In part three, we were talking about changing new development manufacturing processes, and of course this poses a risk in itself. Introducing new processes we are not so familiar with, we have high production rate and we have maybe new verification validation approaches. All this could lead to initial to initial drop of quality of our spacecraft. So there's a risk when we introduce these new approaches, and it is clear that the companies have to have a close look and monitor this effects very closely. So that we don't have high loss of satellites just because of the introduction of new approaches in the development and manufacturing of spacecrafts. Operational risks is another big area if we talk about digitalization in space. If we look at the communication satellite mega constellations risk is interferences. We have not so many frequency bands available in space that can be used for by the spacecraft. And if we have many constellations, they all need to fight for their frequencies. And so there's a danger for interferences, this scarcity of available frequencies is clearly a risk. And the mega constellations also result in a risk of space debris and collisions which we will address in a little bit separately. So what is needed in particular for this mega constellations is clearly international regulations so that we can maintain the asset of space also for the future and have a sustainability really of the asset of space in the future. Another operational risk is the autonomy. We were discussing that the introduction of autonomy is clearly to happen if we want to operate mega constellations. But autonomy also poses the risk that the system and the behavior of system becomes intransparent. So the operator does not understand anymore what the system is doing because it's so highly autonomous. And we have some tragic examples from aviation, where the pilots did not know what the automation of the aircraft was doing and then they took wrong decisions because they didn't understand the state of the aircraft anymore. This is ongoing research and clearly we have to learn from this experiences when we operate spacecraft highly autonomous.
Play video starting at :3:12 and follow transcript3:12
The topic space debris, another important operational risk already existing, but for sure amplified if we launched this mega constellations with thousands of satellites. So this really becomes a very critical risk and threat to spacecrafts and missions and the services eventually that are provided by a space. So we have many spacecrafts in crossing orbits, so a high risk of collision. And then we also have to do something with the spacecraft at end-of-mission. If such spacecrafts are dead, failed, they sit there, and they are in orbits which are quite high so they don't deorbit over time or at least, very, very slowly. So this is really a critical point and this end-of-mission disposal of satellites really needs to consider in the future from the very beginning. So here again, we need international regulations. Another means to to counter a little bit this risk of space debris is so-called space situational awareness. We really have to survey space with different sensors. And on the screen you see a summary of possible sensors that can be used to survey the space and track all objects in space, being it active satellites or dead satellites, or fragments of satellites, or upper stages of launchers. So we can use radar, we can use optical telescopes, we can use lasers for tracking signals, or using even other satellites to track all the other objects in space. And this really needs to be implemented in a very systematic manner, regulations are needed. And these regulations should introduce what is called space traffic management in the future. We probably need this space traffic management, otherwise, we will have many collisions in space. And then this domino effect the so-called Kessler effect will come even earlier than predicted and then spoil the whole orbit and we can't use it anymore. Another obligation that should be really regulated in the future is that all satellite owners should be obliged to remove their satellites from the operational orbits. It's so really deorbit them or bringing them safely on a graveyard orbit so that they are out of the way and don't disturb the operational orbits anymore. So this is an ongoing process, the chapter of the United Nations is taking care of this. And hopefully all spacefaring nations on the Earth are joining this international regulations, because otherwise we probably will sooner or later not be able to use space as we could use it in the past because there is too much debris up there.
Play video starting at :6:18 and follow transcript6:18
Very prominent in the context of digitalization, of course, are cyber threats. All the threats you are aware in terms of using computers being in the Internet, all these threats apply also into the space sector once we are more and more digitalized. Our ground control centers, our ground stations, our production equipment, our manufacturing sites, they will be all connected in a network via the public Internet. And of course, this gives many many access points for cyberattacks, so the operators of these facilities have to be very aware of these threats. This is not specific to the space sector, this is of course specific to the total digital society and industry for .co communities. So we really have to take care of the cyber threats with cybersecurity technology to keep up with threats. Also, the satellites themselves they can be accessed quite directly. If you have an antenna and the communication equipment you can communicate directly to the satellite. So you can hack yourself, so to say, into the satellite and take control, or take over the payload. And this has happened in the past, there are quite a few incidents that satellites control was was not really taken, but they would have been able to take control but they didn't do it. The hackers, maybe just to show that they could do it, or payload has been hijacked and then something was transmitted over the communication channels of satellites. So this happened even though the operators of satellites don't admit this or tell this the public too openly, of course. But it happened and it for sure will happen in the future, so you have to take care of this threats by encryption cybersecurity technology.
Play video starting at :8:23 and follow transcript8:23
There is another graph which summarizes these cyber threats we're having in space. And as you can see on the graph, it's really all segments affected the ground segment, the user segment, the link and the space segment, there is command intrusion, payload control, denial of services. Malware that can be uploaded, replay, that means I'm recording a message or a data stream and then replay later at a point where it is maybe a wrong time. Or spoofing, jamming, hijacking, all the things generally available in for cyberattacks apply now also to all segments in in space business with all these attack points which can be seen here. These attack points are on this different segments. They focus on the weakest element and then it affects the different parts of the system, and this in the worst case can really have a consequence on the mission, maybe even loss of the mission.
Play video starting at :9:35 and follow transcript9:35
If we look on the satellite communication part, we have another risk and threat which is connected to the integrity of data. We mentioned this already, huge amount of data is transferred and I want to be sure that these data are not corrupted, that they have not been modified, or faked, or whatever. So I really have to take care of this by authentication, confidentiality, integrity of data, availability of the data. And this is really making it making the data secure and safe that they can really rely on them and that they are trustworthy. And to do so you have to take efforts on several levels, this is shown on this triangle. Let's say several the levels on the screen on product level, physical safety, people level, or personal safety, security procedures, which is rather organizational security. You have to take care of hardware communication and also software. This is all the levels you have to take care to be to see against cyber threats. Another thing or issue connected to cyber threats is the commercial off-the-shelf parts. We mentioned this in the part three of the lecture that more and more commercial off-the-shelf parts are used for satellites. And this means that I have to globalize my supply change to produce thousands of satellites ordering commercial off-the-shelf parts all over the world. So this is high dependency, so this can be a risk that I that providers not delivering due to political issues. But it also bears the risk and this is the connection to the cyber-physical threat. It bears the risk that these commercial off-the-shelf parts are corrupted so that they have malware or logical bombs integrated and you don't know, and then it's activated after your satellite has been launched. So this is also a risk coming into the game if you use commercial off-the-shelf parts, which is actually a cyber-physical risk. So you see that quite some risks new or old risks, which become more prominent with the new space trend and the digitalization of space. If we if we summarize all these risks which is in this picture on the screen. You can see all the segments as mentioned are really affected space debris, hardware failures, software failures, software threats, viruses, malware, unauthorized access to the satellites, jamming, interception of the link, replay, social engineering, sometimes it's the people which are the unsecure part of the system, or even physical attacks to the ground stations, or even in space having physical attacks from rockets or other satellites. So these are all the threats and there's for sure many more to come, to be discovered, and it is clear that we have to keep up with these. These risks and threats must not be ignored, they must be proactively approached, only then we can use digitalization beneficially for us and for the space sector in the future. This brings me to the end of part four and also to the end of the lecture. And we saw how the digitalization was coming into the space business, the new space trend coming from the Silicon Valley guys. How it was affecting or is affecting the services and products that are already provided and then will be provided in the future with new possibilities coming from new technologies, like artificial intelligence, new ways of communication. And the effects on the manufacturing operations of satellites which is clearly changing our world, changing paradigms. And eventually the risks and threats we have to approach actively not ignoring them. Then the digitalization of space can be really beneficial for us for the space sector, it's a big chance and we should seize this chance. And then if we can handle all this risks and threats, this will be very successful for the future. Thank you for listening to me and to the topic of space and digitalization, bye-bye. [MUSIC]
