# Bavarian Minister for Digitalization Judith Gerlach

Dear ladies and gentlemen, it's a great pleasure for me to say a few words at the launch of your new online course. My name is Judith Gerlach and as the new Bavarian State Minister for Digital Affairs, it's my job to set up and shape Germany's first ministry dedicated to digitalization. It's a real interesting and exciting job. My ministry's self-conception is to be a governmental think tank on the ongoing disruptive digital transformation. I coordinate strategies that already exist, but I am also responsible for developing new ideas and keeping an eye on inventions. What's needed therefore, is creativity reasons, but also pragmatism as well as the willingness to get things done. Digitalization has to make our lives and work easier. Talking about our digital future, there is one thing I consider as extremely important. All technical solutions have to serve the people. People have to be in its focus. Digitalization exists to serve both the individual and our community. That is why the whole society needs to discuss, for example, about how far and how deep digitalization should go where our ethical limits, in which cases, the usage of artificial intelligence should be allowed. We must prevent that digitalization will split our society by excluding or leaving people behind. In my opinion, the main task of my ministry is to serve as a communication hub and to bring digitalization to the people easily in smart, in a human way. With our Brooklyn Bavarian Biergarten, we are investing about six billion euros in digital projects until 2022. Our program exists of 170 subprojects ranging from broadband expansion, we have digital classrooms to digital business, incubators and artificial intelligence. This one takes up a special role in future technologies. On the one hand, we are already investing €218 million and round about a hundred jobs in a competence network for artificial machine intelligence. On the other hand, my ministry keeps pushing the topic by developing and own Bavarian block change strategy. One other extremely important technology, but I'm pretty sure that I do not have to point this out is aerospace. Aerospace is another key driver of technological progress in many ways. In the age of the Internet of things, satellites can help terrestrial providers generate connectivity. But most important, and that's where I draw the bow to you, the aerospace sector is also a guarantator for high-quality jobs and highly skilled young talents. That's why we expand capitalizes in Bavaria in a huge way with a new faculty at the TU Munich, in order to ensure jobs for the future. In general, we find satellite and research being an extremely important domain. Concerning this, the Bavarian aerospace program announced by Bavarian Prime Minister Markus Soder provides significant impetus. Bavarian invests heavily in this sector over the coming years and is set to become Europe's number one aerospace location. Here in Bavaria, we already have a good standing, but we know that we have to be prepared. There are a lot of players on the market. Some of them well-known, others new that are challenging our current position. For example, we can see that the battle for the most talented engineers started already. In world without borders, employees are looking for the best conditions wherever they want. We and you, we are responsible for offering our talented young academics best conditions for a good education and afterwards for the best working environment. I am sure that we can face this challenge together, and I'm already looking forward to getting the most fruitful environment to assist our industry and our young researchers. I wish you a very instructive and fascinating course, Digitalization in Aeronautics and Space.

# What influence has digitalisation on your work?
The digital data and assessing data, especially for the aircraft design and how to come with new configuration especially also in unmanned flying has a large impact. Because especially a small aircraft, we can do a lot of building different concepts for different tasks and there when you take a look at the data, you can improve models which are not really consisting and existing today really to derive data and better design processes for the future. >> It's more interdisciplinary. We have to work with colleagues from robotics. We have to work together with colleagues from sense or systems, to understand the physics behind this and to deal with it, to use it for our application. And so note life is more complex, but challenging, but also with a lot of advantages. >> What digitalization will bring to us is really more flexibility. In the past, in order to change your signal, we had to wait that a new satellite was launched, or that even the system was completely replaced by all these new satellites. Now, we can easily change signals because we have a very flexible signal generator. >> We use it for better machining. We use it for better examples, for more quality, for less cost. There are a lot of challenges but also chances.

# How can we better handle digitalisation?
Well, coming from let's say the traditional Aeronautical Engineering field, we see that its foundations lie in the Classical Mechanical Engineering, which is more often mistaken as, "Okay, we're doing sheet metal bending and drilling holes, stuff like that" But that's not the case anymore. We have to focus more on being system engineers, engineers in all aspects of the flying platform that doesn't go only until propulsion and structures and lightweight materials, but also into functions. Those functions are realized using IT systems, using software. I guess we should use or make use and test all the capabilities that digital data and also analysis of data bring, but we shouldn't forget that we have to match it also against our experience from the past. So basic models, basic expertise, knowledge that we have should also be matched against what we can get out of data, because it's not just that we can now assess data that are available, we can forget all about the physics and the baseline that we have in there. But nevertheless, we have to test what we can do and what we can get from a benefit by using digital data. Do it and give examples, I think it's very important to give the society good examples to show what is possible and to deal with the risks, of course, there risks in all new technologies, but showing successful examples, I think that helps a lot. I would say use it, try it, be open, but also be critical. Try to understand what's happening with the data, what are the risks and threats, try to be aware, but of course, use it. It's a big chance and it can be very beneficial to us.

# Aircraft Design Process
Welcome to this course on Aircraft Design. My name is Mirko Hornung. I'm the Head of the Institute for Aircraft Design at the Technical University of Munich. At the same time, also Executive Director of Research at Bauhaus Luftfahrt and research organization for Long-term Development of Aviation. My main industrial and research background is aircraft design which will also be the main topic of today's course. The dedicated title is Collaborative Aircraft Design. We will take a little bit into what specific on those two elements. Collaboration, at the same time as aircraft design. I will try to show it to you on some dedicated examples. The key design challenge of an aircraft design, is really to find a concept of an aircraft in the very initial phase. So we take for example, the A350 as one example of a long range passenger aircraft. We have dedicated options. How to design the aircraft. What you see, is the final product. But in the initial phase, you have to decide, is it like that? Like the competitor aircraft, the Boeing 787 or the A350. On the first look to the configurations, they look very similar. But in detail, there are huge differences in how you do the technical detailed design. But even more, in very early phases, these are not the only solutions, you can even consider a radical different configuration like you see on the Concord. So I'm looking to supersonic aircraft that could also be a viable solution. This is the design challenge you have to face at very early conceptual design phases where you have to settle the characteristics of the aircraft on that overall configuration. So going to a very old chart which is sketching a little bit the problem that we're facing in early design. So we have to consider a lot of details to get to know the final solution of the aircraft without having all the tools and measures in place really to get the details at very early phases. So the general problem is implementary design, we have a lot of know-how assembled by a variety of experts contributing to an aircraft. So this is a phase where you already know a lot of details about the general configuration. So generally sketch of the aircraft is available. You can split the work to the a lot experts that provide you the data to derive with good performance data to get an assessment of the aircraft itself. Nevertheless, the initial phase to come up with the right concepts, you are in the very early phases of the phase. So what you have to rely on limited information and to do the selection and to fix the concept already. So this, has a high flexibility but they has a high-risk of unknowns that you don't have the expertise at hand ready to do the right selections. So what you try to do now with more digital models and tools that are available to shift that knowledge base forward. So what we want to do, is get more sophisticated tools and know-how of the experts into the process at very early concept definition. So this is the target and we'll see some of the problems that arise with that and how we have to tackle that in a collaborative manner. So the aircraft design process itself. So before we go into the dedicated problems in doing aircraft design today, especially if you have multiple stakeholders involved, we have to spend a few minutes on the aircraft design process itself. So how does it work? So in January, you have a dedicated customer requirement basis. So this is about coming from market forecast, identifying which characteristics like number of passengers, range, and also destinations you want to fly to. Do specify the basis for your aircraft design. At the same time, you also have a set of technologies that are currently in research which might be viable to be inserted into a new aircraft product. So what do you do, is you started iteration to see between the specification. So the top level requirements and possible concepts of the aircraft to find the best trade off between rows. So we're looking for the compromise on the technology side with respect to requirements you want to have. So this is coming to the point where in roughly this phase over here, where you just stepping into the preliminary design, you have that concepts, one or two concepts frozen. So this is a general layout of the aircraft configuration that you want to concentrate on. So going into the phase of preliminary design, this is more or less the phase where you're in working on specifications. So this is where you try to define all the details of your different components, sub-parts, engine, landing gears onto a dedicated detail where you can start the development later on. So we have to differentiate between conceptual design, where you are laying the foundation of basic concept of the aircraft and then specifying it onto the details. The problem is that only in preliminary design, you have all the information available to see if you initial concept really worked out the way that you want to have it. Then you go into detailed design. So this is really getting down to the nuts and bolts, where you do all the sketches of detailed manufacturing sketches to support the initial production of the aircraft. So this is the different phases of the air craft design process that we have to tackle. What we're now trying to do, is to somehow combine the conceptual design with the preliniminary design if you want to shift knowledge from the expert level to early conceptual design phases. This is what we want to tackle in that. So how does it work? So we are starting from design requirements. I'm looking at the available technologies and do concept sketches. It's still like in the old days where you just take a napkin and start to sketch some aircraft configuration which you do as a baseline. Now you do it with modern tools, but nevertheless, it's still the baseline. You come up with an idea where you do some initial configuration stuff. You do an initial sizing. Sizing in that context means that you try to scale the aircraft tool in size where does fulfill exactly the mission requirements that you want to have. Then you go in that initial layout and try to work through the different disciplines. This is all the characteristics coming from aerodynamics structures, which means in the end weight, which is driving the performance of the aircraft and the propulsion system, which has a big contribution to the overall performance of the aircraft. Then you try to bring all the elements or the description of the configuration together with the sizing and the performance optimization. So once you have somehow settled and scales to dedicated configuration, which does fulfill the Requirements, you are still at the top level of the knowledge of the different disciplines, which means aerodynamics, unstructured design, and also on propulsion, and engine sizing. Then you have to go into more detail estimations of all the different disciplines. So you go into a revised layout and then you're digging much more deeper using more sophisticated and high fidelity tools and methods to grow the knowledge about the different disciplines to mature the overall concept of the aircraft. So finally, you end up on unrefined sizing and performance optimization, where you come with a more mature concept of that phase. But this already includes that you have to insert. Especially in this process, the expert know how from the different disciplines. This is what we have to tackle in an overall digital design process to feed in these models and know-how into that design process. So how does it really work in a sequence? Most of the aircraft design processes in that initial assessment do look quite similar. So once you have an aircraft design, you really start with the geometry. So this is always the baseline. So this is why still today you start with sketch of the configuration. Today it's much more sophisticated than past, but nevertheless, it stays the same. Out of the geometry, you start to define and specify your aerodynamics. You start with very low fidelity models in the beginning, and then you dig much deeper by using higher fidelity in later phases. Then you have to estimate the propulsion system over here, where you have to gain thrust data at the same time, which is very distinct and very important for the design is the fuel flow, because this finally derives your mission, fuel requirement, and describes definitely the weight of the aircraft. This is followed by the weight estimation where you have to do the structural layout or why you start with semi-empirical estimations of how the weight distribution in very early aircraft contributions looks like, and then you have to go back into aerodynamics because out of the weight assessment, you get your center of gravity. Just with the center of gravity, you are able to see which stability margin your aircraft has, and you are able to trim the aerodynamic datasets all over the mission performance and to get all the data that you need. So at the end of this assessment phase, you will get all the different data that will allow you to estimate your performance of the aircraft. So you'll have the aerodynamic datasets, you have the weights, you have the thrust, and you have the fuel consumption of the configuration, all in a consistent manner before you do the performance assessment phase. So here in the lower part of the chart, you take a look at the design performance using on one inside dedicated points, which might be due to certification aspects, and you also take a look at the design mission. This gives you finally the feedback, how much mission fuel you need to perform the mission, and this is an indicator on how well your aircraft is efficiency wise in the overall design. Nevertheless, what you also do in that design process, you'll also assess different off design emissions and of design performances, and to also see how robust is your configuration to get through [inaudible] design. So this is the overall process where we have to separate in two blocks. The one is describing the aircraft, the configuration with its characteristics like aerodynamics weight, and also the propulsive forces. The other one is the assessment with respect to the dedicated mission the aircraft has produced. So these are two blocks that we have to do and they are more or less independent of each other. So what do you do in the different phases is you start with the design space exploration. So this means you want to do a lot of trade-off investigations of multiple concepts using multiple technologies, which means you have to be fast. You have to have fast tools that allow you to sweep through all the different possibilities that you have to come up with the best compromise of the different elements in there. So this is where classical multidisciplinary optimization plays a role and more generic semi-empirical methods are used to keep the speed in the process because once you insert higher fidelity tools, it will take much longer to get to a dedicated results of the different parameters. So out of that, you define initial concepts. Out of the initial concepts, you do an evaluation, which is the best compromise and you come up with reference design, which is your baseline solution. Just from there, you now start to use much higher fidelity methods to get into the details and to mature the design in its characteristics. So you're looking to aerodynamic structures, but also systems beside the propulsion system and also mission systems that also play a role if we're not only talking about manned passenger aircraft, but also like unmanned systems as we see them today. Finally, you do with all the details that you now have available and those details can even go up until wind tunnel testing or really testing results of different disciplines, you do the scaling and optimization, which doesn't mean that you change the overall configuration anymore, but you're trying to match the size of the aircraft that it just fits the mission performance that you want to see of the aircraft. Finally, you have to bring it all together in a visualization where you have all the details visible because this in the end defines the overall concept of the aircraft. What is the problem with that? Once we start in the conceptual design, so with very fast MDO based processes to come up with a possible configuration. We are on that phase 1 according to that chart. So we are working with very rough descriptions of the overall configuration. So we have many parameters like length of the fuselage, diameter of the fuselage, the span of the aircraft, the aspect ratio of the wing, and so on. So it's very high level where you can easily address simple formulas like semi-empirical methods, but also simple numerical models to specify the characteristics of the aircraft. This is very fast, so you just take a couple of weeks or months to come up with initial concepts really to be the baseline of your design, and then once you go into the next phases, you get to much more details so the complexity drastically increases. At the same time, the fidelity of the individual tools and methods that you apply is also increasing, and therefore also the time that it takes. So you see the phase 2 where we talk about preliminary design, we are talking about a couple of months to even one or two years, where you do detailing of all the subsystems in these elements in the aircraft. In the phase 3, where you do the detailed design, this is really about structure layer buildup and also how you manufacturer dedicated part. So this is in most of the cases on the final design side itself. So we'll concentrate just on phase 1 or 2. But even in that phase, you have the problem that you have on the same baseline configuration. Now, you have to insert more sophisticated tools and models to mature your design. You don't want to lose the data that you hatch with the initial phase where you did just the estimation with rough models or with initial low fidelity tools and methods. This is what we have to take.

# Collaborative Design Aspects
Once we have now addressed the aircraft design process and also the related activities that you have to perform, we now look into a dedicated topic that is coming up in the recent time really. It's about the collaborative design aspects. Here one of the key elements is that we have a work sharing environment in the aircraft design. So it has increased over the recent decades that more and more activities are spread into the community and already suppliers doing a risk-sharing on role at very early phases of the design process. This provides a dedicated problem onto the design task itself. While in the past, the OEM, the aircraft manufacturer like Airbus, like Boeing but also others, have been doing much of the conceptual and also prenumerated design work within their own expert departments. They now have to insert already supplies at the very early phase, which means while in the past, the key element of defining the aircraft has been more or less in this part, all under the responsibility of one single company and was quite easy to bring all the expertise together and to do that design process. Now, with that support and with the early introduction of the suppliers already in the design process, you now have to find the solution. How you can cut somewhere elements out of that process and insert the capability that the suppliers does bring into the aircraft design are really very initial phases. This brings up a couple of problems and challenges to that. The first of all is how to insert somebody who's external to the company into the design process, where they are responsible to define some of the technologies, but also some of the systems and to provide data to describe the characteristic of the aircraft, which in the end is performance driving. The second one is how to ensure in an overall data set, which is describing that aircraft concept during that phase, in a consistent manner. This also has been in the past and a lot of design processes of existing aircraft being the main challenge, that not all the experts departments have been working on the same data set, leading to difficulties and mismatches of different solutions once it comes to preliminary or detailed design later on. So this has been a classical problem and now we have to find solutions if we want to work together more integrated and to shift the knowledge, even of the suppliers into the process very early on. We have to find solutions. To understand what this means in the process, we have to go a little bit more into the detail how we have to separate the knowledge generation and the knowledge capturing in the data sets itself into the system. What does it mean? In the initial conceptual design, you are more or less defining the aircraft with its main characteristic. Which means you have the aircraft, you don't care exactly how it looks like and what you try to summarize is the performance characteristics with respect to aerodynamics, which means lift generation and drag generation. You have the endurance with a thrust potential and also the fuel consumption and you have the weight of the configuration, which is also a sum of all the different components added up into a wave breakdown and also a center of gravity. If you now have to split it into different responsibilities, the picture changes because in that case, you're talking about individual parts of the aircraft having dedicated expert groups or even external suppliers being responsible for some of those elements and now we have to find the link between both sides because you have to work on a different component but at the same time, you have to provide your contribution to the overall data set of the characteristic to describe the aircraft. Which means, for example, lift generation of the overall configuration, which is not only the wing. Which can also be other parts. This is the kind of breach that we have to take. So what does it mean to cover both aspects? We have to provide an overall system which is set up of two parts. In the one hand side, we have the aircraft architecture, which is more or less the geometric representation of the aircraft itself. You see the wing, you see the fuselage, you see a landing gear, you have the engines, you have a landing gear, so all the different sub-components that do assemble finally the aircraft. So this is the physical representation of the system. On the other side, to do the performance assessment, to do that matching to the requirements that we have to fulfill the aircraft, we are talking on properties or characteristics of the aircraft which are more related to aerodynamics, thrust behavior, fuel consumption of the engine, also the power consumption, like the air conditioning being the highest power consumer on board of the aircraft but we're also talking about weight, which is mainly structure, but also all the other subsystems on board of the aircraft, they need to be put together to get to weight breakdown. Finally, it's the performance. This is the integrated assessment with respect to the design requirements on aircraft level. To be able to do that, you have to ensure that this side does match this side and you have to be able to integrate now a supplier or some external party into the process that they are consistently connected on both sides. To do that, we also need to do the system analytics to that. We do the performances and also system consistency. This is what you do in the assessment of the aircraft configuration. You still have to match it to the requirements, which means mission performance, point performance and also certification requirements and you want to do an optimization altogether. With all the different know-how, with all the different baseline concepts you have on your bench, which you want to include in the assessment. So you doing scaling out or parameter optimization. If you now take the different contributors into that process, we have to disassemble this setup into different elements which we can use to foster that collaboration in the design task. To do that, we have to consider what are data that we are handling and what are tools and models or expertise that we are handling in the process to come to those data. This is a chart where there's an initial separation of what we have. If we talk about requirements, for example, we are definitely talking about data that can be put together and which are not changing too much, except you want to discuss with the customer that some of the requirements doesn't match so you cannot find a compromised aircraft that can fulfill it but nevertheless, it's a data set that you can describe. Then you've got mission performance data, you've got design characteristic coming from certification and so on. The same is true for the aircraft data sets where we have all the information on geometries like wing surface, the aspect ratio of the spin, but also the aerodynamics, which means lift, drag, and also moments characteristic, but also all the different masses and weights. This is where you can see directly the masses and weights are strongly affected by the aircraft architecture, but we have to separate them. One thing is on the left-hand side on the aircraft architecture, you find models, expertise, how you derive those data and then you have to all get them into one consistent data set and this is one important. Each consistent data set does describe a dedicated aircraft. This is very important that we have a consistent data set to describe the same aircraft, although we got the information from different sources and also with different views. This is again back to the left-hand side where we see there are different ways how to tackle the data that we need to have to do the performance assessment. Also on the aircraft optimization, we are also talking about data set because there we're talking about scaling laws, parameters that we want to achieve, key performance indicators that we want to have as our final goal and then we again have a toolbox which allows us to do that integrated system assessment later on to do the point performance, the mission performance, also dedicated certification requirements assessments that we can do with the overall aircraft design. This is the first step really to segment the design process into knowledge and data and this is quite important really to enable the collaborative design.

# TUM ADEBO
So now we would like to go into one dedicated example. So, at Technical University of Munich, we have worked on the aircraft conceptual design environment, which does enable, and also, test some of the features. So we call it ADEBO, which is the aircraft design toolbox, which we would like to take as an example to show how this can be done, and how we also have to implement some of the elements that we have discussed before. So you can also see on that slide, it has been built to feature all kind of different designs, ranging from small-scale, unmanned area vehicles up to different configurations on the civil air transport sector, but also tackling some of the military aircraft products. So you already see there has to be a big flexibility to support initial conceptual design studies, but also as we said before, we have to provide the baseline to get more knowledge into later design processes also to support the preliminary design phase. So what is the basic concepts behind that aircraft design box that we have? So, as we said before, we have the necessity to take data in there, so Knowledge, which means databases and functions. We have to have tools available which will start with very generic semi-empiric methods in the very beginning, but the more mature we get in the design process, we have to get medium and high fidelity tools, also to be possible to insert the quality, and also the amount of data that we can incorporate in them, and this is all integrated into the consistent data model, and this is the representation of the aircraft concept that is the baseline, and also the derivatives of that. To do that, to come to that aircraft design, we somehow have to be able to define the process, because we have seen it before as a standard sequence of coming from geometry over aerodynamics, engine sizing, the structure layout, which derives the weights, and the center of gravity back to the trimmed aerodynamics. We somehow have to tailor that process using the different tools and methods that we have to come up with the material design. So this is the general information of that, it all has to be controllable with the. In that case, it's not only one user, it also has to be able to be split among entities so that you are, even in a company, are possible to have multiple experts working on that at the same time, and also external companies within that. In that respect, you have to keep in mind that an expert may be just interested to work on his signal system. So he will concentrate on his expert module to specify and mature the technology, and also the sub-components that he's responsible of, and then insert it back into the overall system, but nevertheless, we have to ensure the consistency in it, and this is what's called prior driving. So, to get a feeling about what this would mean, I'm on a tool repository, what we have currently integrated, you have different fidelities, like we do the design chart, and the design chart is a very simple semi-empirical methodology to come up with the first solution of how an aircraft should look like. So it's very simple equations that you insert in there, which are very quick, very intuitive, so you can come up with a very early design. Then you get into a more sophisticated one, like certain elements like XFLR5 or XFOIL, where you already go one step deeper into describing the aerodynamic characteristic on aircraft, for example, or you have PAWAT tool which is an in-house tool that has been developed also to match propulsive devices, which means propellers or other propulsors interacting with the aerodynamics of the aircraft, and this has an effect on the trimmed aerodynamics, and also on the performance on that aircraft is seen. So this is a kind of fidelity level which on the university level we can insert, but nevertheless, there is the flexibility once we talk about toolboxes, to even integrate much more complex on tools like, for example, high-scale multi fidelity, TFT solutions tool, do the aerodynamics, or even structural analysis to do the structural layout. But we also have visualization tools in there to show and see, an easy possibility to see, does the aircraft match with all the configurations. So do we have a consistent dataset. So this is where we use currently models like openVSP, which give us the very quick graphic representation of the configuration that we have at hand. So the key challenge now is once we now separate the dataset from the tools itself, we still want to rely on expert know how from that expert that has been working on a dedicated technology and the sub-system over decades, probably, in the company. So they have been building up tools by themselves. So either it's a tool that's publicly available, but there are also tools that have been growing over the design experience within the company, which is inherit know-how of the company itself, and mainly focused on the expert. So the key challenge with all those design processes is how you insert this kind of knowledge in the design process, and this is where you have to get a connection from the tool, from the dedicated expert tool to the database, because this is where you have aggregated all the information about the configuration which does form the baseline for the analysis the expert has to do. So what do you have to do? You have to work with the kind of Wrapper that enables you to get the communication back and forth, so input and output, with the database which should provide a consistent single database capturing all the aircraft variables. So this is what you have to do, so you have to find a Wrapper Concept that enables that. How you do that, we don't have to redress in detail, but nevertheless, it's important that you take an existing tool, bring it into the process chain by interacting with the core database which is describing the aircraft. So finally, it gets the data from the database, and also puts them again, and now once we talk about expert know-how, we also have to trigger a process because this could mean a part of that dataset describing the aircraft configuration has changed, and that change might have implications to other disciplines and other experts that need to get to trigger now that they have to redo some of their assessments and their modeling approaches, because some of the assumptions in the baseline data have changed over time. This is something which we have to capture in the process. We need to get that expertise into the process, and still enable that this final configuration really is consistent, because if you have a change in that area over here, it might to lead to a situation that in that area over here, you're no longer consistent with those data, and this is what you have to trigger, and this is what you also have to capture in the design process. So how is it done? A general layout of the ADEBO tool environment that we have set up, so the upper part is describing the ADDAM, which is our data model behind it. So this is the central entity which will capture all the data from the models to ensure that you have a consistent approach. So which means we have the database describing the aircraft configuration itself. But what you can see is we have here a kind of an artificial engineer inserted which will take care that some of the elements in dealing with the database does ensure consistency among the different contributors. Which means elements like checking if the units are correct, checking if the values that a tool or an expert tried to put into the database does fit with the kind of physical dimension that you want to have in that area, and also to do some conversion elements that will help you in handling the database. At the same time, you can also rely on data from existing aircraft configurations. So studies that you already have done before, or a configuration that are similar to the kind of design tasks that you have to tackle. You can also use those data to bring them in as a baseline configuration and then you worked from that starting point to come up with a new derived configuration from that. So this is still all on the data side and then you have that interface to that toolbox. The toolbox is nothing else than providing expertise in changing the aircraft concept and it's from aerodynamics to weights to aerodynamics to even performance assessment. Everything can be in there, but to get to an aircraft design, we now have to bring it into dedicated process of how you want to do it and the following two slides will show you two examples of how this could look like. Because depending on your design tasks, you might have different focus areas where you want to concentrate on. The first one is for a classical transport aircraft. So you have a definition of your top-level aircraft requirements. So initial assumptions that you want to take, how the aircraft should look like performance-wise in the end. So this is your starting point, then as we said before, you start with the baseline aerodynamics, do with baseline aerodynamics and initial performance assessment. So what is the benefit, what is the key element that this aircraft will bring to that? So this is a slightly different setup to what we've seen before. So you do an initial step to get an estimation of where we are performance-wise. Then, once you have the resides and giving you the first estimation about performance parameters, but also on fuel consumption that you have all the mission, you can then go into the different sub-modules which will now describe the single disciplines of your aircraft design which means gas turbine sizings or the scaling of the provider system giving you the right technology, which means thrust levels and also a few consumption. Then you have the fuselage sizings or which passenger compartment you want to have in there and also how does it match the overall aerodynamic performance of the aircraft? You do the weight estimation, also the center of gravity estimation in their tail sizing which is the next step. We need to come up with a trim configuration and this already includes liability assessments and then finally, with all the components sized and scaled to what you need and for that configuration, you will get up with a component mass estimation. Here you have the flexibility by building up the database that you can just integrate over all the subsystems that you have assembled in your database. You can just sum up the weight and also automatically derive the center of gravity, which will then get you back to the performance assessment over here. So this is the second time once you go through that loop and then you have different convergence moves which will ensure fast calculation of that configuration. The big benefit now is if you take a look at the different jobs here, can now work with your toolset and come up with different levels of fidelity in the tools and just insert them in the process.This is how you can now mature the knowledge and the details of the configuration, at the same time, the database itself. So we have seen before on the atom database, the number of details in the database will increase. So also other disciplines can now take additional data off out of the database and also increase the level of fidelity in the assessment. If you now take a look at another example like an unmanned vehicle, there might be different task to that because an unmanned vehicle in most of the cases as we use them today, are more for electro-optical sensors carrying, so more surveillance task in contrast to the classical transport task that you see in passenger aircraft. So this might be a different, slightly different focus on what we have to look into to get the best design at the end. So you see some of the elements are still the same. So initialization which means top-level requirements also on the assumptions are the same. You also start with Vin's aerodynamics and masses to get the tail sizing and mass you see, in this respect, you dismiss that part of initial performance assessment. So you directly try to figure out consistently aircraft design. Then you go into the required energy and power battery selection. Also, in this case, on an electric motor chain, also have to consider the electric components like motor controllers in there, the electric motor and so on, and the propeller selection and then in this case, if you have an electric propulsion system, we first of all need to converge this solution because otherwise, it doesn't match the aircraft performance requirements and in the next step, you will again take the overall mouse and which is also something specific for unmanned vehicles. You have to find a configuration layout based on the components that you need to install. Because if your main mission is to carry a sensor to do your surveillance task or communication task, you want to have dedicated performance characters, like on an electro-optical sensor. You want to have as much visibility as possible, and that might be achieved at different positions of the aircraft. Now we have to really do component arrangement in the fuselage, which can drive the overall mission performance of the aircraft. So with that known, you can do the fuselage loft creation because you're no longer bound to something like a passenger cabin, but you can arrange it according to components and this will definitely again, effect your configuration aerodynamics and so you have to close the loop again to get back to the trim situation on the overall aerodynamics and then closing the loop again, which will drive you to a converged design. So what you can easily see, depending on the design task, it might mean necessarily that you assemble different steps of the process in a different manner, also using different tools and also other fidelity levels to come to that solution and this can only be done by separating the tools and methods block from the database itself, which then in that case also supports that collaborative aspect that we have seen before. How is it implemented? Currently to also foster that collaboration over entities that we have a dedicated setup which means you have a distribution part, which is the upper part here where you have all the tool repository, the databases, but also the baseline software in an online available manner and the key element here is that you can now do a mirroring between the centralized database to your local computer. So you can work on your discipline, but you always link it again and see the differences in the center database, which is on the network and this always ensures that everybody who is accessing the database gets some information. If something has changed from an expert level, from a user-level into that main database where you have to redo your calculations and this is the core element, how it has been set up to really ensure that you're always working with consistent data, which again has been a major driver for a lot of redesign work that was necessary in previous aircraft design terms. To sum up the challenges and also the solutions that we have seen on collaborative aircraft designed. A few comments on this one. So what we have seen that the aircraft design process has to deal with multiple levels of tools and also methods to be used. So in initial phases, we have to rely on fast, simple methods, but we have to mature and this means we have to integrate higher fidelity solutions in later phases without dismissing the knowledge that we already have assembled on the aircraft configuration. At the same time, to enable that, we have to consider framework tools that allow this increasing fidelity in the design process. At the same time, also to increase knowledge that has already been assembled, either on companies or on experts that have been working on dedicated solutions and products. This means to get both views together. We have, on the one hand, sides to consider discipline-centered representation of the aircraft configuration. Because the overarching disciplines like aerodynamics, weights and also the propulsive forces do assemble the performance of the aircraft to the final product. At the same time with the work-sharing set-up, we have to consider also that we have to do with components centered because this is where the expertise is going in and if we go much more into detail of the aircraft configuration, we also have to work on the component. This to ensure the consistency on the different groups working on that aircraft design. We have to work with the centralized database and this is key because this is the only guarantee you can have consistent data, multiple experts or entities working on the same configuration so that the results are really fused into one consistent aircraft design. So this is quite important. So the data management on that temporal database is one of the key elements that you have to ensure if you want to support collaborative design, which is necessary in that work-sharing environment and also to ease that working across boundaries of entities and also teams, you also have to work on standards and also some conventions that you have to take in the team and this is quite important to just smoothen the process in that design exercise. So these are the overarching topics that you have to address to get collaborative aircraft design working in an organization. So good luck on your next design task and thanks for watching this online course.
