# basic
Hello everyone. My name is Peter Stutz. I'm professor of aeronautical engineering at the University of the Armed Forces in Munich. Today I'm going to talk to you about digital avionics networks. So the first question that arise is, what are avionics? It's very simple actually. It's an artificial and mixed word comprised of aviation and electronics. So it actually means all electronic equipment on board of the aircraft. Again, today we talk about digital avionics networks. So first I'll give you some basic ideas about networking technologies and then lead you into three examples of existing networking technologies. This will be the ARINC 429, the Mil-standard 1553 or also called Mil-BUS, and the ARINC 664 AFDX. So since the invention of aircraft, it was always the goal to assemble information and to sample data on various points of the aircraft, on certain aircraft state variables, on the state of certain aircraft systems and relay this information to parties who are interested in that data. Usually, that data sampling was achieved by having sensors such as, for example, if you want to measure altitude or airspeed, you need to have some pressure measuring devices at certain parts of the aircraft and then the data was then relayed, for example, to instruments in the cockpit and displayed to whoever is interested in that case, let's say the flight crew and the presentation of the data was done via analog instruments. Actually, the whole data processing or data transmission was analog. Analog, in this case, means that, well, analog voltage values, for example, were transmitted via a standard copper wire and then put on some analog display or instrument. The problem with that was that this data sampling and information transmission added additional weight and complexity to the overall aircraft system. In the '60s and '70s, the idea was born, why not having a common media to communicate with? The same time, digital data processing came up and we all know that. We all have our experiences by now with that in our everyday life using our computers, using our smartphones, using the Internet and the web, all that ideas then came into the aircraft by using digital avionics networks. The most important point of this idea is so that now several components use the same media to communicate with. We see that in the lower part of the slide, where you'll see a well-networked component system, which we now call the digital avionic network. In the community, it's also called the avionics BUS. BUS here doesn't stand actually for the vehicle, it's an abbreviation, it stands for binary unit system.
Play video starting at :3:48 and follow transcript3:48
So as said, the goal of avionic networks is to enable communication between digital IT components. I already mentioned some of those components. Those may be sensors, computers, displays, actuators, just to name a few.
Play video starting at :4:11 and follow transcript4:11
There are specific requirements we put on this networks. First, it's quite self-understanding, I guess. High data rate, and now comes something that's really airborne-specific, high-reliability, integrity, real-time capability, and deterministic behavior. In terms of safety-critical systems, we have a couple of those on board of aircraft, it's very important that those networks work reliable and in integer way. We think that the failure of that networks might cause the loss of life because certain systems, if they fail, would lead to an aircraft crash or accident.
Play video starting at :5:2 and follow transcript5:02
Now, on to some more basics. Let's talk about transmission modes. In the easiest way, we talk about simplex systems or simplex transmission. Please imagine a regular radio broadcast station. Here, one entity, or the broadcast station itself, communicates to a receiver, just some people having a radio with them. So here the communication is only one way and there is no way for entity two. If you have a look at the slide in the upper part, can come back to entity one. If you want to achieve that, both way communication, we have to go into duplex transmission modes. Also, here we can discriminate between half-duplex and full-duplex. Half-duplex uses the same channel, the same media, however, only one sender at a time can send a message. So if entity number 2 wants to send the message back to number 1, it has to wait until one has sent its message and the message is processed. So no simultaneous transmission of message is allowed on half-duplex transmission. If you want to achieve a simultaneous transmission, then we need to have full-duplex transmission mode. These usually requires a separate channel for sending in any direction or a very sophisticated way of managing messages on one single channel. The problem with using a single channel for both way simultaneous communication is that it would lead to collisions on the wire if two messages more or less meet during their travel through the wire and therefore usually gets either eliminated or garbled.
Play video starting at :7:24 and follow transcript7:24
Another thing we should talk about is topology. Here in that slide, you'll see four types of topologies. On the upper left, you see the star topology. Its unique feature s a centerpiece, which we use to call either switches or router. We all know that because that kind of topology is what we usually have also in our homes, in our offices. The switches are those we connect our computers, our laptops to if we have a wired connection, or email wireless connection, although that would connect directly to that central component. So that's the star topology. It can be even more complex. So we can form hierarchical architectures from star topologies and then with that, create tree topologies, which is symbolized on the upper-right. Another way to interface those different networked components is the linear topology, which you see on the lower left. Its feature is the actual backbone media where all computer components connect to. Of course, again, if that fails, similar to the switch in the star topology, then the network would go down. A fourth topology type is the ring topology. It's for mere completion actually, it displayed here. It doesn't have a great meaning in the world of avionics. However, star and linear topologies, we will come back to that just in a few minutes.
Play video starting at :9:21 and follow transcript9:21
Now, a word to the actual transmission media. For now, we do not have a widespread usage of wireless communication in aircraft. Usually, we have wired, cabled networks and it's wise to mention two important attributes of those cabling,
Play video starting at :9:53 and follow transcript9:53
and it's all about how to prevent interference with other networks, other components, other electronic devices. First, that's what you see in the upper part is we are using a twisted-pair wires which are shielded. [inaudible]. First, we're using twisted paired wires which are shielded. The twisting helps us to accept interference and disturbing signals from the outside in an equalized manner on both wires. With that, it's easier for us to eliminate actually those disturbances later on. The shielding, well, prevents the input of outside interferences just into the wire pair. The second part I would like to mention is symmetric signaling. So again, think of the wire pair. We need to, well, bring on a certain wavefront that's traveling here to transmit that. It's not that one wire just carries the reference mass and the other wire carries information signal. Now, we're doing it a little bit more complicated. We have the signal wavefront going on one cable. Sorry, it's different. We are having the signal front on one wire traveling as it is designed, and having the same signal, but just inverted on the other wire.
Play video starting at :11:54 and follow transcript11:54
With that mechanism, we help to prevent interference to other circuits. On the lower right, you see two different ways of such symmetric signaling which are used on digital avionic networks. Now, last within the section of giving some basic ideas, is what a generic network would look like in a linear topology. Again, you would see here the backbone consisting of twisted-pair wire, you would see is several avionics components which would like to communicate with other. Here they are called avionics LRUs, a very common abbreviation again, and LRU stands for line replaceable unit. I think that every avionics engineer, once in his lifetime, will deal with that abbreviation.

# ARINC 429
nd now we discuss several different implemented avionic networks.
Play video starting at ::18 and follow transcript0:18
Here in this table, you see a variety of realized networks. And you also see in which aircraft types they are used in.
Play video starting at ::29 and follow transcript0:29
You're going to talk about three different types here, those marked in blue and bold letters. So the first network we're going to talk about is the ARINC 429.
Play video starting at ::42 and follow transcript0:42
Well, some may call it, it's the mother of all avionic buses, and it's heavily used in large airliners still up today. The second avionics bus we are talking about is the middle bus, the middle standard 1553. And it actually comes from the military world.
Play video starting at :1:6 and follow transcript1:06
It has greater performance. Then the ARINC 429 was developed a little later.
Play video starting at :1:14 and follow transcript1:14
And lastly, we come to the ARINC 664, or also called AFDX avionics bus, which has been developed by Airbus, and now is adopted also by Boeing. So now, for the first, let's have a look at ARINC 429. The characteristics are actually pretty simple for a bus. And now, you know the basics, and you can judge that by yourself.
Play video starting at :1:44 and follow transcript1:44
It's a simplex bus, it's unidirectional. So there's only one sender, which talks to a lot of receivers.
Play video starting at :1:52 and follow transcript1:52
A lot means up to 20 receiver maximum. The wiring, as you already know also, is regular shielded twisted pair.
Play video starting at :2:3 and follow transcript2:03
It's a linear topology.
Play video starting at :2:7 and follow transcript2:07
And the actual message that's going to transmit it, it is a 32-bit word. The bitrate is 100 kilo bits per second.
Play video starting at :2:21 and follow transcript2:21
So please mind, we are talking, more or less, the 70s and the 80s.
Play video starting at :2:27 and follow transcript2:27
And at that time, this was pretty fast, actually. Now in what you have at home is gigabit networks, gigabyte networks. So that's a multiple times faster than that. Again, a generic architecture in this now belongs to an ARINC 429 network.
Play video starting at :2:51 and follow transcript2:51
Again, it's unidirectional.
Play video starting at :2:54 and follow transcript2:54
What you see here is a sending entity, LRU 0 that's transmitting. And it's marked with a TX for transmit. And you see four receiving entities marked with an RX.
Play video starting at :3:12 and follow transcript3:12
The wiring itself, it's only one twisted pair cable, as we have gotten to know before.
Play video starting at :3:21 and follow transcript3:21
What you don't see here is redundancy.
Play video starting at :3:24 and follow transcript3:24
If you want to prevent a breakdown of your network
Play video starting at :3:33 and follow transcript3:33
occurring from cable problems, cabling problems on the backbone, you would need to install a second identical bus. And also introduce some kind of redundancy management.
Play video starting at :3:49 and follow transcript3:49
This is done with ARINC 429, but per se, it's a nonredundant bus.
Play video starting at :3:59 and follow transcript3:59
Data over the message that's relayed on a 429 bus.
Play video starting at :4:7 and follow transcript4:07
You see a container for the label, you see a container for the data, and some ancillaries.
Play video starting at :4:14 and follow transcript4:14
On the lower part of the slide, you see an example of a message that might be transferred through the bus.
Play video starting at :4:25 and follow transcript4:25
So the label is 102. It stands for selected altitude. You would find all those labels and the affiliated values in the ARINC 429 specification, which by now, has more or less the size of a telephone book.
Play video starting at :4:45 and follow transcript4:45
So selected altitude can be transmitted here. What is selected altitude, by the way? Well, it's, for example, the value a pilot would dial in his flight control unit, in order to hand it over to the autopilot. To hand it over to the flight control system to have that altitude acquired and maintained.
Play video starting at :5:8 and follow transcript5:08
The specification also helps the engineer
Play video starting at :5:14 and follow transcript5:14
to better formalize the message. It says okay, the unit is feet, the range that can be dealt with 16 significant bits goes up to 65536 feet. And therefore, resulting a resolution of feet. It also goes into minimum and maximum transmission rates.
Play video starting at :5:44 and follow transcript5:44
And with that, you can build, or the engineer can build their own transmission system, having component 0 talking to component 1 to n.
Play video starting at :6:3 and follow transcript6:03
The problem with simplex buses is that usually you have a demand for communication in many ways, not only in one way.
Play video starting at :6:13 and follow transcript6:13
So if you want to also to have LRU 0 receiving messages for LRU 1 to n, you would need to install
Play video starting at :6:25 and follow transcript6:25
other four to nine buses here. You see five buses installed on LRU 0 to 4, just to enable communication in every thinkable way. This of course is a disadvantage of simplex buses, and the next example, the MIL bus, deals with that.

# Mil-STD 1553
The MiL-standard 1553 network or as we also call it the MilBus, now is bidirectional and more specific. It's half-duplex, you know what that means.
Play video starting at ::23 and follow transcript0:23
It can have up to 32 sending and receiving entities with it, and it's already dual redundant by design. It is based on shielded twisted pair, again. It's again linear topology. The word size is only 20 bits now, and the bit rate is one megabit per second. So it's 10 times more performance as [inaudible]. Here we see the architecture. Well, it looks similar to the one before, but please mind first, the second here, back-up bus called additional network. There is internal redundancy management, so whenever there's an error or a flaw on primary bus A, the network switches over to backup bus B, so that bus can be used already for safety critical applications.
Play video starting at :1:38 and follow transcript1:38
Another very important thing is that in order to realize half duplicity, we have a so-called bus controller; entity Number 1, BC, that actually controls and orchestrates all the communication traffic on the bus. So nobody sends and receives on the bus unless told so by the bus controller. With that, collisions can be prevented by that managing agency, the bus controller.
Play video starting at :2:23 and follow transcript2:23
On that slide, you see some transmission control schemes. The bus controller actually orchestrates and manages all the communication traffic that's going on on the network. No remote terminal which are all the other components on the bus are allowed to either send or receive a message without the explicit direction of the bus controller. On this slide, we see transmission control schemes for the MilBus. If the bus controller wants to send data to a remote terminal, it sends and receive command to the remote terminal, it sends only the data, and then commands its status word from the remote terminal.
Play video starting at :3:24 and follow transcript3:24
If data has to be sent from a remote terminal to the bus controller, then the bus controller sends a sent command to the remote terminal, which by itself then sends first its status then the data. Last, if data needs to be sent from one remote terminal to another, then it's the task of the controller to tell the receiving remote terminal to get ready for reception and tells the sending entity to send off its data. So again, no communication takes place without the explicit consent of the bus controller.

# ARINC 664 / AFDX
Now, the last network type we're going to talk about is AFDX. AFDX also stands for Avionics Full-Duplex Switched network and the abbreviation already tells something, so it's full-duplex, and please remember what full-duplex means. It means all entities on the bus can talk simultaneously and of course also receive simultaneously.
Play video starting at ::37 and follow transcript0:37
So besides being full-duplex, the number of network entities on AFDX networks is very high due to the possibility of hierarchical networking, and most important AFDX or talking about its specification, ARINC 664 is based on COTS Ethernet. You might have heard about ethernet, it's the way of network communication you are all using back at your home. We're all using usually in our labs, we are using in our local area networks, and that was actually also the idea behind it and I'll come to that in a second. The wiring here, actually, it's unshielded twisted pair. It's a star tree topology, so we have a router or a switch in the middle. The wordsize has dynamic sizes and the bit rate now is 10-100 megabits per second. There are even talks about one gigabit implementations here.
Play video starting at :2:4 and follow transcript2:04
Here we see the architecture, the typical star architecture with the switch in the middle. Now here we do not have remote terminals as we have it with a mail-bus. We call those the end systems into the most simplest way you can think of a network card put into one of the LRUs. Here we have five LRUs or 4 plus n, and you also have a second switch which symbolizes the hierarchical decomposition of the overall network.
Play video starting at :2:40 and follow transcript2:40
Please feel reminded on, as I've said before, the networks you're used to in your offices, in your labs back at home.
Play video starting at :2:53 and follow transcript2:53
The idea to have that commercial off-the-shelf approach came from seeing the advantage of already developed IT components and system in the consumer area in the industrial area. Before that, again, ARINC 429 mail-bus, these buses were developed solely for avionic purposes, which is good on one thing, but makes it very expensive to develop that and also to advance the technology. The idea that was lying behind the AFDX network was to use already existing technology in industry and consumer IT area to be re-used within the aerospace domain. In that specific idea, it was the ethernet network as it was defined in the IEEE 802.3 standard to use that as a baseline and adopted to aviation needs. The advantages are at the hand. Most of those components were already developed. There were there and not only developed for aviation, but to all other needs which are actually more many-fold than aviation. Further on, technological advancements are now expected, actually not only coming from the Asian community, but from the overall IT community. Before that ARINC 429, and mail-bus were sorely developed for the aerospace community, which made the development very unique and also very expensive. Now having, let's say, the whole knowledge of the IT world at hand, it was expected that the technological advancement, the development of the AFDX bus was easier, faster, and also cheaper. However, of course, the specification of the, let's call it the standard ethernet did not meet all requirements with respect to determinism, real-time capability, and low latency on one side, as well as reliability, integrity on the other side that were needed by aerospace applications. So that standard or that technology needed adaptations to fulfill also these requirements, and now we'll have a look on those. So the measures taken to fulfill those requirements, determinism and low latency on one side, reliability, and integrity on the other side are as follows: First, determinism and low latency, here, it was desired to realize full-duplex communication without the danger of collisions. First-generation regular ethernet didn't care about collisions. Messages were just sent like that and hopefully they went through, usually they actually went through, but there wasn't guarantee there really would reach intact. If you have, well, regular non-critical communication, that didn't matter much, your message was reset. But that wasn't bearable for a lot of avionics communication where a certain transmission time shouldn't be exceeded. So for that separated wire pairs for transmission and reception of information between the end systems and the switches were introduced, so no fear of collisions anymore. Further was static routing, the neat thing with ethernet when it's used like an application of the worldwide web is that the routes that the package actually travel is not prescribed. By that, a dynamic structure of the whole network system can be achieved. That's nice for realizing a worldwide web. It's nightmare for having it on the aircraft. In the aircraft you want to have a controlled system and with that you can allow a static routing. This means you can prescribe the individual way a packet travels through your network, and with that also, the time of travel is prescribed. As a third point for determinism and low latency, we have the possibility to have a strict bandwidth management by limiting transmission rates and frame sizes.
Play video starting at :8:3 and follow transcript8:03
Talking about reliability and integrity, redundancy was introduced to AFDX by a mere doubling of all components. So you have two switches, and doubling the harnesses, also doubling the end systems, and by that you have already dual redundancy. Of course, as we have already seen with the mail-bus, you need integrity monitoring, that means you have to listen on both lanes actually, if some messages on GAR route or if you're can detect any errors or invalid frames.
Play video starting at :8:40 and follow transcript8:40
So this was my short presentation on digital avionic networks, I hope you enjoyed it. If you want to have more details, feel free to have a deeper look in those two references I am giving at the end of the slides. Thank you very much.
